*** start of the project gutenberg ebook 1154 ***

_the voyages of doctor dolittle_

[illustration:

         i
    his landing
      on the
      island

        ii
    his meeting
      with the
       beetle

        iii
    he liberates
      the lost
      families

       iv
    he makes
      fire

         v
    he leads the
     people to
    victory in
       war

      vi
     he is
    crowned
     king

the popsipetel picture-history of king jong thinkalot]




[illustration]

    _the_ voyages _of_
    doctor dolittle

    illustrated by the author

    by hugh lofting

    _published by
    fredk. a. stokes co.
    at 443 fourth avenue new york a.d. 1922_




    _copyright, 1922, by_
    frederick a. stokes company

    _all rights reserved, including that of translation
    into foreign languages_

    first printing,        august 18, 1922
    second printing,     november 10, 1922
    third printing,      february 28, 1923
    fourth printing,         june 20, 1923
    fifth printing,        august 16, 1923
    sixth printing,      november 30, 1923
    seventh printing,       april 18, 1925
    eighth printing,        march 19, 1926
    ninth printing,          july 30, 1927
    tenth printing,         april 11, 1928
    eleventh printing,       june 19, 1929
    twelfth printing,   september 12, 1930
    thirteenth printing,   august 10, 1931
    fourteenth printing, september 1, 1933

    _printed in the united states of america_




    _to
    colin
    and
    elizabeth_




_contents_


    part one
    chapter                                      page
    prologue                                        1
       i the cobblers son                          3
      ii i hear of the great naturalist             8
     iii the doctors home                         15
      iv the wiff-waff                             24
       v polynesia                                 32
      vi the wounded squirrel                      41
     vii shellfish talk                            45
    viii are you a good noticer?                   50
      ix the garden of dreams                      55
       x the private zoo                           60
      xi my schoolmaster, polynesia                65
     xii my great idea                             70
    xiii a traveler arrives                        75
     xiv chee-chees voyage                        80
      xv i become a doctors assistant             84

    part two
       i the crew of the curlew                  88
      ii luke the hermit                           91
     iii jip and the secret                        95
      iv bob                                       99
       v mendoza                                  105
      vi the judges dog                          111
     vii the end of the mystery                   116
    viii three cheers                             121
      ix the purple bird-of-paradise              126
       x long arrow, the son of golden arrow      129
      xi blind travel                             135
     xii destiny and destination                  140

    part three
       i the third man                            144
      ii good-bye!                                151
     iii our troubles begin                       155
      iv our troubles continue                    160
       v polynesia has a plan                     167
      vi the bed-maker of monteverde              172
     vii the doctors wager                       177
    viii the great bullfight                      184
      ix we depart in a hurry                     193

    part four
       i shellfish languages again                198
      ii the fidgits story                       205
     iii bad weather                              221
      iv wrecked!                                 225
       v land!                                    233
      vi the jabizri                              239
     vii hawks-head mountain                     245

    part five
       i a great moment                           253
      ii the men of the moving land             262
     iii fire                                     266
      iv what makes an island float               271
       v war!                                     275
      vi general polynesia                        282
     vii the peace of the parrots                 287
    viii the hanging stone                        291
      ix the election                             300
       x the coronation of king jong              308

    part six
       i new popsipetel                           314
      ii thoughts of home                         322
     iii the red mans science                    328
      iv the sea-serpent                          332
       v the shellfish riddle solved at last      340
      vi the last cabinet meeting                 346
     vii the doctors decision                    350




_illustrations_


  the popsipetel picture-history of king jong thinkalot
        (in colors)                                      _frontispiece_
                                                                  page
  i would sit on the river-wall with my feet dangling
        over the water                                              5
  and in her right foot she carried a lighted candle!             22
  being a good noticer is terribly important                    53
  a traveler arrives                                                77
  on the bed sat the hermit                                      101
  sat scowling down upon the amazed and gaping jury              115
  what else can i think?                                       133
  boy, wheres the skipper?                                    147
  in these lower levels we came upon the shadowy shapes
        of dead ships (in colors)                                 162
  the doctor started chatting in spanish to the bed-maker        175
  did acrobatics on the beasts horns                            189
  he talks english!                                            201
  i was alone in the ocean!                                      226
  it was a great moment                                          257
  the terrible three                                               279
  working away with their noses against the end of the
        island                                                    293
  the whispering rocks                                           295
  had to chase his butterflies with a crown upon his head        317
  tiptoe incognito, whispered bumpo                            353




_the voyages of doctor dolittle_




the voyages of doctor dolittle




prologue


all that i have written so far about doctor dolittle i heard long after
it happened from those who had known himindeed a great deal of it took
place before i was born. but i now come to set down that part of the
great mans life which i myself saw and took part in.

many years ago the doctor gave me permission to do this. but we were
both of us so busy then voyaging around the world, having adventures
and filling note-books full of natural history that i never seemed to
get time to sit down and write of our doings.

now of course, when i am quite an old man, my memory isnt so good any
more. but whenever i am in doubt and have to hesitate and think, i
always ask polynesia, the parrot.

that wonderful bird (she is now nearly two hundred and fifty years old)
sits on the top of my desk, usually humming sailor songs to herself,
while i write this book. and, as every one who ever met her knows,
polynesias memory is the most marvelous memory in the world. if
there is any happening i am not quite sure of, she is always able to
put me right, to tell me exactly how it took place, who was there and
everything about it. in fact sometimes i almost think i ought to say
that this book was written by polynesia instead of me.

very well then, i will begin. and first of all i must tell you
something about myself and how i came to meet the doctor.




part i




_the first chapter_

the cobblers son


my name was tommy stubbins, son of jacob stubbins, the cobbler of
puddleby-on-the-marsh; and i was nine and a half years old. at that
time puddleby was only quite a small town. a river ran through the
middle of it; and over this river there was a very old stone bridge,
called kingsbridge, which led you from the market-place on one side to
the churchyard on the other.

sailing-ships came up this river from the sea and anchored near the
bridge. i used to go down and watch the sailors unloading the ships
upon the river-wall. the sailors sang strange songs as they pulled upon
the ropes; and i learned these songs by heart. and i would sit on the
river-wall with my feet dangling over the water and sing with the men,
pretending to myself that i too was a sailor.

for i longed always to sail away with those brave ships when they
turned their backs on puddleby church and went creeping down the river
again, across the wide lonely marshes to the sea. i longed to go with
them out into the world to seek my fortune in foreign landsafrica,
india, china and peru! when they got round the bend in the river and
the water was hidden from view, you could still see their huge brown
sails towering over the roofs of the town, moving onward slowlylike
some gentle giants that walked among the houses without noise. what
strange things would they have seen, i wondered, when next they came
back to anchor at kingsbridge! and, dreaming of the lands i had never
seen, id sit on there, watching till they were out of sight.

three great friends i had in puddleby in those days. one was joe, the
mussel-man, who lived in a tiny hut by the edge of the water under the
bridge. this old man was simply marvelous at making things. i never saw
a man so clever with his hands. he used to mend my toy ships for me
which i sailed upon the river; he built windmills out of packing-cases
and barrel-staves; and he could make the most wonderful kites from old
umbrellas.

joe would sometimes take me in his mussel-boat, and when the tide
was running out we would paddle down the river as far as the edge of
the sea to get mussels and lobsters to sell. and out there on the
cold lonely marshes we would see wild geese flying, and curlews and
redshanks and many other kinds of seabirds that live among the samfire
and the long grass of the great salt fen. and as we crept up the river
in the evening, when the tide had turned, we would see the lights
on kingsbridge twinkle in the dusk, reminding us of tea-time and warm
fires.

[illustration: i would sit on the river-wall with my feet dangling
over the water]

another friend i had was matthew mugg, the cats-meat-man. he was a
funny old person with a bad squint. he looked rather awful but he
was really quite nice to talk to. he knew everybody in puddleby;
and he knew all the dogs and all the cats. in those times being a
cats-meat-man was a regular business. and you could see one nearly any
day going through the streets with a wooden tray full of pieces of meat
stuck on skewers crying, meat! m-e-a-t! people paid him to give this
meat to their cats and dogs instead of feeding them on dog-biscuits or
the scraps from the table.

i enjoyed going round with old matthew and seeing the cats and dogs
come running to the garden-gates whenever they heard his call.
sometimes he let me give the meat to the animals myself; and i thought
this was great fun. he knew a lot about dogs and he would tell me
the names of the different kinds as we went through the town. he had
several dogs of his own; one, a whippet, was a very fast runner, and
matthew used to win prizes with her at the saturday coursing races;
another, a terrier, was a fine ratter. the cats-meat-man used to make
a business of rat-catching for the millers and farmers as well as his
other trade of selling cats-meat.

my third great friend was luke the hermit. but of him i will tell you
more later on.

i did not go to school; because my father was not rich enough to send
me. but i was extremely fond of animals. so i used to spend my time
collecting birds eggs and butterflies, fishing in the river, rambling
through the countryside after blackberries and mushrooms and helping
the mussel-man mend his nets.

yes, it was a very pleasant life i lived in those days long agothough
of course i did not think so then. i was nine and a half years old;
and, like all boys, i wanted to grow upnot knowing how well off i was
with no cares and nothing to worry me. always i longed for the time
when i should be allowed to leave my fathers house, to take passage
in one of those brave ships, to sail down the river through the misty
marshes to the seaout into the world to seek my fortune.




_the second chapter_

i hear of the great naturalist


one early morning in the springtime, when i was wandering among the
hills at the back of the town, i happened to come upon a hawk with a
squirrel in its claws. it was standing on a rock and the squirrel was
fighting very hard for its life. the hawk was so frightened when i came
upon it suddenly like this, that it dropped the poor creature and flew
away. i picked the squirrel up and found that two of its legs were
badly hurt. so i carried it in my arms back to the town.

when i came to the bridge i went into the mussel-mans hut and asked
him if he could do anything for it. joe put on his spectacles and
examined it carefully. then he shook his head.

yon critturs got a broken leg, he saidand another badly cut an
all. i can mend you your boats, tom, but i havent the tools nor the
learning to make a broken squirrel seaworthy. this is a job for a
surgeonand for a right smart one an all. there be only one man i know
who could save yon critturs life. and thats john dolittle.

who is john dolittle? i asked. is he a vet?

no, said the mussel-man. hes no vet. doctor dolittle is a
nacheralist.

whats a nacheralist?

a nacheralist, said joe, putting away his glasses and starting to
fill his pipe, is a man who knows all about animals and butterflies
and plants and rocks an all. john dolittle is a very great
nacheralist. im surprised you never heard of himand you daft over
animals. he knows a whole lot about shellfishthat i know from my own
knowledge. hes a quiet man and dont talk much; but theres folks who
do say hes the greatest nacheralist in the world.

where does he live? i asked.

over on the oxenthorpe road, tother side the town. dont know just
which house it is, but most anyone cross there could tell you, i
reckon. go and see him. hes a great man.

so i thanked the mussel-man, took up my squirrel again and started off
towards the oxenthorpe road.

the first thing i heard as i came into the market-place was some one
calling meat! m-e-a-t!

theres matthew mugg, i said to myself. hell know where this doctor
lives. matthew knows everyone.

so i hurried across the market-place and caught him up.

matthew, i said, do you know doctor dolittle?

do i know john dolittle! said he. well, i should think i do! i know
him as well as i know my own wifebetter, i sometimes think. hes a
great mana very great man.

can you show me where he lives? i asked. i want to take this
squirrel to him. it has a broken leg.

certainly, said the cats-meat-man. ill be going right by his house
directly. come along and ill show you.

so off we went together.

oh, ive known john dolittle for years and years, said matthew as we
made our way out of the market-place. but im pretty sure he aint
home just now. hes away on a voyage. but hes liable to be back any
day. ill show you his house and then youll know where to find him.

all the way down the oxenthorpe road matthew hardly stopped talking
about his great friend, doctor john dolittlem. d. he talked so much
that he forgot all about calling out meat! until we both suddenly
noticed that we had a whole procession of dogs following us patiently.

where did the doctor go to on this voyage? i asked as matthew handed
round the meat to them.

i couldnt tell you, he answered. nobody never knows where he goes,
nor when hes going, nor when hes coming back. he lives all alone
except for his pets. hes made some great voyages and some wonderful
discoveries. last time he came back he told me hed found a tribe of
red indians in the pacific oceanlived on two islands, they did. the
husbands lived on one island and the wives lived on the other. sensible
people, some of them savages. they only met once a year, when the
husbands came over to visit the wives for a great feastchristmas-time,
most likely. yes, hes a wonderful man is the doctor. and as for
animals, well, there aint no one knows as much about em as what he
does.

how did he get to know so much about animals? i asked.

the cats-meat-man stopped and leant down to whisper in my ear.

_he talks their language_, he said in a hoarse, mysterious voice.

the animals language? i cried.

why certainly, said matthew. all animals have some kind of a
language. some sorts talk more than others; some only speak in
sign-language, like deaf-and-dumb. but the doctor, he understands them
allbirds as well as animals. we keep it a secret though, him and me,
because folks only laugh at you when you speak of it. why, he can
even write animal-language. he reads aloud to his pets. hes wrote
history-books in monkey-talk, poetry in canary language and comic
songs for magpies to sing. its a fact. hes now busy learning the
language of the shellfish. but he says its hard workand he has caught
some terrible colds, holding his head under water so much. hes a great
man.

he certainly must be, i said. i do wish he were home so i could meet
him.

well, theres his house, look, said the cats-meat-manthat little
one at the bend in the road therethe one high uplike it was sitting
on the wall above the street.

we were now come beyond the edge of the town. and the house that
matthew pointed out was quite a small one standing by itself. there
seemed to be a big garden around it; and this garden was much higher
than the road, so you had to go up a flight of steps in the wall before
you reached the front gate at the top. i could see that there were many
fine fruit trees in the garden, for their branches hung down over the
wall in places. but the wall was so high i could not see anything else.

when we reached the house matthew went up the steps to the front gate
and i followed him. i thought he was going to go into the garden; but
the gate was locked. a dog came running down from the house; and he
took several pieces of meat which the cats-meat-man pushed through
the bars of the gate, and some paper bags full of corn and bran. i
noticed that this dog did not stop to eat the meat, as any ordinary
dog would have done, but he took all the things back to the house and
disappeared. he had a curious wide collar round his neck which looked
as though it were made of brass or something. then we came away.

the doctor isnt back yet, said matthew, or the gate wouldnt be
locked.

what were all those things in paper-bags you gave the dog? i asked.

oh, those were provisions, said matthewthings for the animals to
eat. the doctors house is simply full of pets. i give the things to
the dog, while the doctors away, and the dog gives them to the other
animals.

and what was that curious collar he was wearing round his neck?

thats a solid gold dog-collar, said matthew. it was given to him
when he was with the doctor on one of his voyages long ago. he saved a
mans life.

how long has the doctor had him? i asked.

oh, a long time. jips getting pretty old now. thats why the doctor
doesnt take him on his voyages any more. he leaves him behind to take
care of the house. every monday and thursday i bring the food to the
gate here and give it him through the bars. he never lets any one come
inside the garden while the doctors awaynot even me, though he knows
me well. but youll always be able to tell if the doctors back or
notbecause if he is, the gate will surely be open.

so i went off home to my fathers house and put my squirrel to bed in
an old wooden box full of straw. and there i nursed him myself and took
care of him as best i could till the time should come when the doctor
would return. and every day i went to the little house with the big
garden on the edge of the town and tried the gate to see if it were
locked. sometimes the dog, jip, would come down to the gate to meet
me. but though he always wagged his tail and seemed glad to see me, he
never let me come inside the garden.




_the third chapter_

the doctors home


one monday afternoon towards the end of april my father asked me to
take some shoes which he had mended to a house on the other side of the
town. they were for a colonel bellowes who was very particular.

i found the house and rang the bell at the front door. the colonel
opened it, stuck out a very red face and said, go round to the
tradesmens entrancego to the back door. then he slammed the door
shut.

i felt inclined to throw the shoes into the middle of his flower-bed.
but i thought my father might be angry, so i didnt. i went round
to the back door, and there the colonels wife met me and took the
shoes from me. she looked a timid little woman and had her hands all
over flour as though she were making bread. she seemed to be terribly
afraid of her husband whom i could still hear stumping round the house
somewhere, grunting indignantly because i had come to the front door.
then she asked me in a whisper if i would have a bun and a glass of
milk. and i said, yes, please.

after i had eaten the bun and milk, i thanked the colonels wife and
came away. then i thought that before i went home i would go and see
if the doctor had come back yet. i had been to his house once already
that morning. but i thought id just like to go and take another look.
my squirrel wasnt getting any better and i was beginning to be worried
about him.

so i turned into the oxenthorpe road and started off towards the
doctors house. on the way i noticed that the sky was clouding over and
that it looked as though it might rain.

i reached the gate and found it still locked. i felt very discouraged.
i had been coming here every day for a week now. the dog, jip, came to
the gate and wagged his tail as usual, and then sat down and watched me
closely to see that i didnt get in.

i began to fear that my squirrel would die before the doctor came back.
i turned away sadly, went down the steps on to the road and turned
towards home again.

i wondered if it were supper-time yet. of course i had no watch of my
own, but i noticed a gentleman coming towards me down the road; and
when he got nearer i saw it was the colonel out for a walk. he was all
wrapped up in smart overcoats and mufflers and bright-colored gloves.
it was not a very cold day but he had so many clothes on he looked
like a pillow inside a roll of blankets. i asked him if he would please
tell me the time.

he stopped, grunted and glared down at mehis red face growing redder
still; and when he spoke it sounded like the cork coming out of a
gingerbeer-bottle.

do you imagine for one moment, he spluttered, that i am going to get
myself all unbuttoned just to tell a little boy like you _the time_!
and he went stumping down the street, grunting harder than ever.

i stood still a moment looking after him and wondering how old i would
have to be, to have him go to the trouble of getting his watch out. and
then, all of a sudden, the rain came down in torrents.

i have never seen it rain so hard. it got dark, almost like night. the
wind began to blow; the thunder rolled; the lightning flashed, and in a
moment the gutters of the road were flowing like a river. there was no
place handy to take shelter, so i put my head down against the driving
wind and started to run towards home.

i hadnt gone very far when my head bumped into something soft and
i sat down suddenly on the pavement. i looked up to see whom i had
run into. and there in front of me, sitting on the wet pavement like
myself, was a little round man with a very kind face. he wore a shabby
high hat and in his hand he had a small black bag.

im very sorry, i said. i had my head down and i didnt see you
coming.

to my great surprise, instead of getting angry at being knocked down,
the little man began to laugh.

you know this reminds me, he said, of a time once when i was in
india. i ran full tilt into a woman in a thunderstorm. but she was
carrying a pitcher of molasses on her head and i had treacle in my hair
for weeks afterwardsthe flies followed me everywhere. i didnt hurt
you, did i?

no, i said. im all right.

it was just as much my fault as it was yours, you know, said the
little man. i had my head down toobut look here, we mustnt sit
talking like this. you must be soaked. i know i am. how far have you
got to go?

my home is on the other side of the town, i said, as we picked
ourselves up.

my goodness, but that _was_ a wet pavement! said he. and i declare
its coming down worse than ever. come along to my house and get dried.
a storm like this cant last.

he took hold of my hand and we started running back down the road
together. as we ran i began to wonder who this funny little man could
be, and where he lived. i was a perfect stranger to him, and yet
he was taking me to his own home to get dried. such a change, after
the old red-faced colonel who had refused even to tell me the time!
presently we stopped.

here we are, he said.

i looked up to see where we were and found myself back at the foot
of the steps leading to the little house with the big garden! my new
friend was already running up the steps and opening the gate with some
keys he took from his pocket.

surely, i thought, this cannot be the great doctor dolittle himself!

i suppose after hearing so much about him i had expected some one very
tall and strong and marvelous. it was hard to believe that this funny
little man with the kind smiling face could be really he. yet here he
was, sure enough, running up the steps and opening the very gate which
i had been watching for so many days!

the dog, jip, came rushing out and started jumping up on him and
barking with happiness. the rain was splashing down heavier than ever.

are you doctor dolittle? i shouted as we sped up the short
garden-path to the house.

yes, im doctor dolittle, said he, opening the front door with the
same bunch of keys. get in! dont bother about wiping your feet. never
mind the mud. take it in with you. get in out of the rain!

i popped in, he and jip following. then he slammed the door to behind
us.

the storm had made it dark enough outside; but inside the house,
with the door closed, it was as black as night. then began the most
extraordinary noise that i have ever heard. it sounded like all sorts
and kinds of animals and birds calling and squeaking and screeching
at the same time. i could hear things trundling down the stairs and
hurrying along passages. somewhere in the dark a duck was quacking,
a cock was crowing, a dove was cooing, an owl was hooting, a lamb
was bleating and jip was barking. i felt birds wings fluttering
and fanning near my face. things kept bumping into my legs and
nearly upsetting me. the whole front hall seemed to be filling up
with animals. the noise, together with the roaring of the rain, was
tremendous; and i was beginning to grow a little bit scared when i felt
the doctor take hold of my arm and shout into my ear.

dont be alarmed. dont be frightened. these are just some of my pets.
ive been away three months and they are glad to see me home again.
stand still where you are till i strike a light. my gracious, what a
storm!just listen to that thunder!

so there i stood in the pitch-black dark, while all kinds of animals
which i couldnt see chattered and jostled around me. it was a curious
and a funny feeling. i had often wondered, when i had looked in from
the front gate, what doctor dolittle would be like and what the funny
little house would have inside it. but i never imagined it would be
anything like this. yet somehow after i had felt the doctors hand upon
my arm i was not frightened, only confused. it all seemed like some
queer dream; and i was beginning to wonder if i was really awake, when
i heard the doctor speaking again:

my blessed matches are all wet. they wont strike. have you got any?

no, im afraid i havent, i called back.

never mind, said he. perhaps dab-dab can raise us a light somewhere.

then the doctor made some funny clicking noises with his tongue and i
heard some one trundle up the stairs again and start moving about in
the rooms above.

then we waited quite a while without anything happening.

will the light be long in coming? i asked. some animal is sitting on
my foot and my toes are going to sleep.

no, only a minute, said the doctor. shell be back in a minute.

and just then i saw the first glimmerings of a light around the landing
above. at once all the animals kept quiet.

[illustration: and in her right foot she carried a lighted candle!]

i thought you lived alone, i said to the doctor.

so i do, said he. it is dab-dab who is bringing the light.

i looked up the stairs trying to make out who was coming. i could not
see around the landing but i heard the most curious footstep on the
upper flight. it sounded like some one hopping down from one step to
the other, as though he were using only one leg.

as the light came lower, it grew brighter and began to throw strange
jumping shadows on the walls.

ahat last! said the doctor. good old dab-dab!

and then i thought i _really_ must be dreaming. for there, craning her
neck round the bend of the landing, hopping down the stairs on one leg,
came a spotless white duck. and in her right foot she carried a lighted
candle!




_the fourth chapter_

the wiff-waff


when at last i could look around me i found that the hall was indeed
simply full of animals. it seemed to me that almost every kind of
creature from the countryside must be there: a pigeon, a white rat, an
owl, a badger, a jackdawthere was even a small pig, just in from the
rainy garden, carefully wiping his feet on the mat while the light from
the candle glistened on his wet pink back.

the doctor took the candlestick from the duck and turned to me.

look here, he said: you must get those wet clothes offby the way,
what is your name?

tommy stubbins, i said.

oh, are you the son of jacob stubbins, the shoemaker?

yes, i said.

excellent bootmaker, your father, said the doctor. you see these?
and he held up his right foot to show me the enormous boots he was
wearing. your father made me those boots four years ago, and ive
been wearing them ever sinceperfectly wonderful bootswell now, look
here, stubbins. youve got to change those wet thingsand quick. wait
a moment till i get some more candles lit, and then well go upstairs
and find some dry clothes. youll have to wear an old suit of mine till
we can get yours dry again by the kitchen-fire.

so presently when more candles had been lighted round different parts
of the house, we went upstairs; and when we had come into a bedroom the
doctor opened a big wardrobe and took out two suits of old clothes.
these we put on. then we carried our wet ones down to the kitchen and
started a fire in the big chimney. the coat of the doctors which i was
wearing was so large for me that i kept treading on my own coat-tails
while i was helping to fetch the wood up from the cellar. but very
soon we had a huge big fire blazing up the chimney and we hung our wet
clothes around on chairs.

now lets cook some supper, said the doctor.youll stay and have
supper with me, stubbins, of course?

already i was beginning to be very fond of this funny little man who
called me stubbins, instead of tommy or little lad (i did so
hate to be called little lad!) this man seemed to begin right away
treating me as though i were a grown-up friend of his. and when he
asked me to stop and have supper with him i felt terribly proud and
happy. but i suddenly remembered that i had not told my mother that i
would be out late. so very sadly i answered,

thank you very much. i would like to stay, but i am afraid that my
mother will begin to worry and wonder where i am if i dont get back.

oh, but my dear stubbins, said the doctor, throwing another log of
wood on the fire, your clothes arent dry yet. youll have to wait
for them, wont you? by the time they are ready to put on we will have
supper cooked and eatendid you see where i put my bag?

i think it is still in the hall, i said. ill go and see.

i found the bag near the front door. it was made of black leather and
looked very, very old. one of its latches was broken and it was tied up
round the middle with a piece of string.

thank you, said the doctor when i brought it to him.

was that bag all the luggage you had for your voyage? i asked.

yes, said the doctor, as he undid the piece of string. i dont
believe in a lot of baggage. its such a nuisance. lifes too short to
fuss with it. and it isnt really necessary, you knowwhere _did_ i put
those sausages?

the doctor was feeling about inside the bag. first he brought out a
loaf of new bread. next came a glass jar with a curious metal top to
it. he held this up to the light very carefully before he set it down
upon the table; and i could see that there was some strange little
water-creature swimming about inside. at last the doctor brought out a
pound of sausages.

now, he said, all we want is a frying-pan.

we went into the scullery and there we found some pots and pans hanging
against the wall. the doctor took down the frying-pan. it was quite
rusty on the inside.

dear me, just look at that! said he. thats the worst of being away
so long. the animals are very good and keep the house wonderfully clean
as far as they can. dab-dab is a perfect marvel as a housekeeper.
but some things of course they cant manage. never mind, well soon
clean it up. youll find some silver-sand down there, under the sink,
stubbins. just hand it up to me, will you?

in a few moments we had the pan all shiny and bright and the sausages
were put over the kitchen-fire and a beautiful frying smell went all
through the house.

while the doctor was busy at the cooking i went and took another look
at the funny little creature swimming about in the glass jar.

what is this animal? i asked.

oh that, said the doctor, turning roundthats a wiff-waff. its
full name is _hippocampus pippitopitus_. but the natives just call
it a wiff-waffon account of the way it waves its tail, swimming,
i imagine. thats what i went on this last voyage for, to get that.
you see im very busy just now trying to learn the language of the
shellfish. they _have_ languages, of that i feel sure. i can talk
a little shark language and porpoise dialect myself. but what i
particularly want to learn now is shellfish.

why? i asked.

well, you see, some of the shellfish are the oldest kind of animals in
the world that we know of. we find their shells in the rocksturned to
stonethousands of years old. so i feel quite sure that if i could only
get to talk their language, i should be able to learn a whole lot about
what the world was like ages and ages and ages ago. you see?

but couldnt some of the other animals tell you as well?

i dont think so, said the doctor, prodding the sausages with a fork.
to be sure, the monkeys i knew in africa some time ago were very
helpful in telling me about bygone days; but they only went back a
thousand years or so. no, i am certain that the oldest history in the
world is to be had from the shellfishand from them only. you see most
of the other animals that were alive in those very ancient times have
now become extinct.

have you learned any shellfish language yet? i asked.

no. ive only just begun. i wanted this particular kind of a pipe-fish
because he is half a shellfish and half an ordinary fish. i went all
the way to the eastern mediterranean after him. but im very much
afraid he isnt going to be a great deal of help to me. to tell you the
truth, im rather disappointed in his appearance. he doesnt _look_
very intelligent, does he?

no, he doesnt, i agreed.

ah, said the doctor. the sausages are done to a turn. come
alonghold your plate near and let me give you some.

then we sat down at the kitchen-table and started a hearty meal.

it was a wonderful kitchen, that. i had many meals there afterwards
and i found it a better place to eat in than the grandest dining-room
in the world. it was so cozy and home-like and warm. it was so handy
for the food too. you took it right off the fire, hot, and put it on
the table and ate it. and you could watch your toast toasting at the
fender and see it didnt burn while you drank your soup. and if you
had forgotten to put the salt on the table, you didnt have to get up
and go into another room to fetch it; you just reached round and took
the big wooden box off the dresser behind you. then the fireplacethe
biggest fireplace you ever sawwas like a room in itself. you could get
right inside it even when the logs were burning and sit on the wide
seats either side and roast chestnuts after the meal was overor listen
to the kettle singing, or tell stories, or look at picture-books by the
light of the fire. it was a marvelous kitchen. it was like the doctor,
comfortable, sensible, friendly and solid.

while we were gobbling away, the door suddenly opened and in marched
the duck, dab-dab, and the dog, jip, dragging sheets and pillow-cases
behind them over the clean tiled floor. the doctor, seeing how
surprised i was, explained:

theyre just going to air the bedding for me in front of the fire.
dab-dab is a perfect treasure of a housekeeper; she never forgets
anything. i had a sister once who used to keep house for me (poor, dear
sarah! i wonder how shes getting oni havent seen her in many years).
but she wasnt nearly as good as dab-dab. have another sausage?

the doctor turned and said a few words to the dog and duck in some
strange talk and signs. they seemed to understand him perfectly.

can you talk in squirrel language? i asked.

oh yes. thats quite an easy language, said the doctor. you could
learn that yourself without a great deal of trouble. but why do you
ask?

because i have a sick squirrel at home, i said. i took it away from
a hawk. but two of its legs are badly hurt and i wanted very much to
have you see it, if you would. shall i bring it to-morrow?

well, if its leg is badly broken i think i had better see it to-night.
it may be too late to do much; but ill come home with you and take a
look at it.

so presently we felt the clothes by the fire and mine were found to be
quite dry. i took them upstairs to the bedroom and changed, and when i
came down the doctor was all ready waiting for me with his little black
bag full of medicines and bandages.

come along, he said. the rain has stopped now.

outside it had grown bright again and the evening sky was all red with
the setting sun; and thrushes were singing in the garden as we opened
the gate to go down on to the road.




_the fifth chapter_

polynesia


i think your house is the most interesting house i was ever in, i
said as we set off in the direction of the town. may i come and see
you again to-morrow?

certainly, said the doctor. come any day you like. to-morrow ill
show you the garden and my private zoo.

oh, have you a zoo? i asked.

yes, said he. the larger animals are too big for the house, so i
keep them in a zoo in the garden. it is not a very big collection but
it is interesting in its way.

it must be splendid, i said, to be able to talk all the languages of
the different animals. do you think i could ever learn to do it?

oh surely, said the doctorwith practise. you have to be very
patient, you know. you really ought to have polynesia to start you. it
was she who gave me my first lessons.

who is polynesia? i asked.

polynesia was a west african parrot i had. she isnt with me any more
now, said the doctor sadly.

whyis she dead?

oh no, said the doctor. she is still living, i hope. but when we
reached africa she seemed so glad to get back to her own country. she
wept for joy. and when the time came for me to come back here i had not
the heart to take her away from that sunny landalthough, it is true,
she did offer to come. i left her in africaah well! i have missed her
terribly. she wept again when we left. but i think i did the right
thing. she was one of the best friends i ever had. it was she who
first gave me the idea of learning the animal languages and becoming
an animal doctor. i often wonder if she remained happy in africa, and
whether i shall ever see her funny, old, solemn face againgood old
polynesia!a most extraordinary birdwell, well!

just at that moment we heard the noise of some one running behind us;
and turning round we saw jip the dog rushing down the road after us,
as fast as his legs could bring him. he seemed very excited about
something, and as soon as he came up to us, he started barking and
whining to the doctor in a peculiar way. then the doctor too seemed to
get all worked up and began talking and making queer signs to the dog.
at length he turned to me, his face shining with happiness.

polynesia has come back! he cried. imagine it. jip says she has just
arrived at the house. my! and its five years since i saw herexcuse
me a minute.

he turned as if to go back home. but the parrot, polynesia, was already
flying towards us. the doctor clapped his hands like a child getting
a new toy; while the swarm of sparrows in the roadway fluttered,
gossiping, up on to the fences, highly scandalized to see a gray and
scarlet parrot skimming down an english lane.

on she came, straight on to the doctors shoulder, where she
immediately began talking a steady stream in a language i could not
understand. she seemed to have a terrible lot to say. and very soon
the doctor had forgotten all about me and my squirrel and jip and
everything else; till at length the bird clearly asked him something
about me.

oh excuse me, stubbins! said the doctor. i was so interested
listening to my old friend here. we must get on and see this squirrel
of yourspolynesia, this is thomas stubbins.

the parrot, on the doctors shoulder, nodded gravely towards me and
then, to my great surprise, said quite plainly in english,

how do you do? i remember the night you were born. it was a terribly
cold winter. you were a very ugly baby.

stubbins is anxious to learn animal language, said the doctor. i was
just telling him about you and the lessons you gave me when jip ran up
and told us you had arrived.

well, said the parrot, turning to me, i may have started the doctor
learning but i never could have done even that, if he hadnt first
taught me to understand what _i_ was saying when i spoke english.
you see, many parrots can talk like a person, but very few of them
understand what they are saying. they just say it becausewell, because
they fancy it is smart or, because they know they will get crackers
given them.

by this time we had turned and were going towards my home with jip
running in front and polynesia still perched on the doctors shoulder.
the bird chattered incessantly, mostly about africa; but now she spoke
in english, out of politeness to me.

how is prince bumpo getting on? asked the doctor.

oh, im glad you asked me, said polynesia. i almost forgot to tell
you. what do you think?_bumpo is in england!_

in england!you dont say! cried the doctor. what on earth is he
doing here?

his father, the king, sent him here to a place callederbullford, i
think it wasto study lessons.

bullford!bullford! muttered the doctor. i never heard of the
placeoh, you mean oxford.

yes, thats the placeoxford, said polynesia i knew it had cattle in
it somewhere. oxfordthats the place hes gone to.

well, well, murmured the doctor. fancy bumpo studying at
oxfordwell, well!

there were great doings in jolliginki when he left. he was scared to
death to come. he was the first man from that country to go abroad. he
thought he was going to be eaten by white cannibals or something. you
know what those niggers arethat ignorant! well!but his father made
him come. he said that all the black kings were sending their sons to
oxford now. it was the fashion, and he would have to go. bumpo wanted
to bring his six wives with him. but the king wouldnt let him do that
either. poor bumpo went off in tearsand everybody in the palace was
crying too. you never heard such a hullabaloo.

do you know if he ever went back in search of the sleeping beauty?
asked the doctor.

oh yes, said polynesiathe day after you left. and a good thing for
him he did: the king got to know about his helping you to escape; and
he was dreadfully wild about it.

and the sleeping beauty?did he ever find her?

well, he brought back something which he _said_ was the sleeping
beauty. myself, i think it was an albino niggeress. she had red hair
and the biggest feet you ever saw. but bumpo was no end pleased with
her and finally married her amid great rejoicings. the feastings lasted
seven days. she became his chief wife and is now known out there as the
crown-princess bum_pah_you accent the last syllable.

and tell me, did he remain white?

only for about three months, said the parrot. after that his face
slowly returned to its natural color. it was just as well. he was so
conspicuous in his bathing-suit the way he was, with his face white and
the rest of him black.

and how is chee-chee getting on?chee-chee, added the doctor in
explanation to me, was a pet monkey i had years ago. i left him too in
africa when i came away.

well, said polynesia frowning,chee-chee is not entirely happy. i
saw a good deal of him the last few years. he got dreadfully homesick
for you and the house and the garden. its funny, but i was just the
same way myself. you remember how crazy i was to get back to the dear
old land? and africa _is_ a wonderful countryi dont care what anybody
says. well, i thought i was going to have a perfectly grand time. but
somehowi dont knowafter a few weeks it seemed to get tiresome. i
just couldnt seem to settle down. well, to make a long story short,
one night i made up my mind that id come back here and find you. so
i hunted up old chee-chee and told him about it. he said he didnt
blame me a bitfelt exactly the same way himself. africa was so deadly
quiet after the life we had led with you. he missed the stories you
used to tell us out of your animal booksand the chats we used to have
sitting round the kitchen-fire on winter nights. the animals out there
were very nice to us and all that. but somehow the dear kind creatures
seemed a bit stupid. chee-chee said he had noticed it too. but i
suppose it wasnt they who had changed; it was we who were different.
when i left, poor old chee-chee broke down and cried. he said he felt
as though his only friend were leaving himthough, as you know, he has
simply millions of relatives there. he said it didnt seem fair that i
should have wings to fly over here any time i liked, and him with no
way to follow me. but mark my words, i wouldnt be a bit surprised if
he found a way to comesome day. hes a smart lad, is chee-chee.

at this point we arrived at my home. my fathers shop was closed and
the shutters were up; but my mother was standing at the door looking
down the street.

good evening, mrs. stubbins, said the doctor. it is my fault your
son is so late. i made him stay to supper while his clothes were
drying. he was soaked to the skin; and so was i. we ran into one
another in the storm and i insisted on his coming into my house for
shelter.

i was beginning to get worried about him, said my mother. i am
thankful to you, sir, for looking after him so well and bringing him
home.

dont mention itdont mention it, said the doctor. we have had a
very interesting chat.

who might it be that i have the honor of addressing? asked my mother
staring at the gray parrot perched on the doctors shoulder.

oh, im john dolittle. i dare say your husband will remember me. he
made me some very excellent boots about four years ago. they really
are splendid, added the doctor, gazing down at his feet with great
satisfaction.

the doctor has come to cure my squirrel, mother, said i. he knows
all about animals.

oh, no, said the doctor, not all, stubbins, not all about them by
any means.

it is very kind of you to come so far to look after his pet, said my
mother. tom is always bringing home strange creatures from the woods
and the fields.

is he? said the doctor. perhaps he will grow up to be a naturalist
some day. who knows?

wont you come in? asked my mother. the place is a little untidy
because i havent finished the spring cleaning yet. but theres a nice
fire burning in the parlor.

thank you! said the doctor. what a charming home you have!

and after wiping his enormous boots very, very carefully on the mat,
the great man passed into the house.




_the sixth chapter_

the wounded squirrel


inside we found my father busy practising on the flute beside the fire.
this he always did, every evening, after his work was over.

the doctor immediately began talking to him about flutes and piccolos
and bassoons; and presently my father said,

perhaps you perform upon the flute yourself, sir. wont you play us a
tune?

well, said the doctor, it is a long time since i touched the
instrument. but i would like to try. may i?

then the doctor took the flute from my father and played and played and
played. it was wonderful. my mother and father sat as still as statues,
staring up at the ceiling as though they were in church; and even i,
who didnt bother much about music except on the mouth-organeven i
felt all sad and cold and creepy and wished i had been a better boy.

oh i think that was just beautiful! sighed my mother when at length
the doctor stopped.

you are a great musician, sir, said my father, a very great
musician. wont you please play us something else?

why certainly, said the doctoroh, but look here, ive forgotten all
about the squirrel.

ill show him to you, i said. he is upstairs in my room.

so i led the doctor to my bedroom at the top of the house and showed
him the squirrel in the packing-case filled with straw.

the animal, who had always seemed very much afraid of methough i had
tried hard to make him feel at home, sat up at once when the doctor
came into the room and started to chatter. the doctor chattered back
in the same way and the squirrel when he was lifted up to have his leg
examined, appeared to be rather pleased than frightened.

i held a candle while the doctor tied the leg up in what he called
splints, which he made out of match-sticks with his pen-knife.

i think you will find that his leg will get better now in a very short
time, said the doctor closing up his bag. dont let him run about for
at least two weeks yet, but keep him in the open air and cover him up
with dry leaves if the nights get cool. he tells me he is rather lonely
here, all by himself, and is wondering how his wife and children are
getting on. i have assured him you are a man to be trusted; and i will
send a squirrel who lives in my garden to find out how his family are
and to bring him news of them. he must be kept cheerful at all costs.
squirrels are naturally a very cheerful, active race. it is very hard
for them to lie still doing nothing. but you neednt worry about him.
he will be all right.

then we went back again to the parlor and my mother and father kept him
playing the flute till after ten oclock.

although my parents both liked the doctor tremendously from the first
moment that they saw him, and were very proud to have him come and play
to us (for we were really terribly poor) they did not realize then
what a truly great man he was one day to become. of course now, when
almost everybody in the whole world has heard about doctor dolittle and
his books, if you were to go to that little house in puddleby where
my father had his cobblers shop you would see, set in the wall over
the old-fashioned door, a stone with writing on it which says: john
dolittle, the famous naturalist, played the flute in this house in the
year 1839.

i often look back upon that night long, long ago. and if i close my
eyes and think hard i can see that parlor just as it was then: a funny
little man in coat-tails, with a round kind face, playing away on the
flute in front of the fire; my mother on one side of him and my father
on the other, holding their breath and listening with their eyes shut;
myself, with jip, squatting on the carpet at his feet, staring into the
coals; and polynesia perched on the mantlepiece beside his shabby high
hat, gravely swinging her head from side to side in time to the music.
i see it all, just as though it were before me now.

and then i remember how, after we had seen the doctor out at the front
door, we all came back into the parlor and talked about him till it
was still later; and even after i did go to bed (i had never stayed up
so late in my life before) i dreamed about him and a band of strange
clever animals that played flutes and fiddles and drums the whole night
through.




_the seventh chapter_

shellfish talk


the next morning, although i had gone to bed so late the night before,
i was up frightfully early. the first sparrows were just beginning to
chirp sleepily on the slates outside my attic window when i jumped out
of bed and scrambled into my clothes.

i could hardly wait to get back to the little house with the big
gardento see the doctor and his private zoo. for the first time in
my life i forgot all about breakfast; and creeping down the stairs on
tip-toe, so as not to wake my mother and father, i opened the front
door and popped out into the empty, silent street.

when i got to the doctors gate i suddenly thought that perhaps it was
too early to call on any one: and i began to wonder if the doctor would
be up yet. i looked into the garden. no one seemed to be about. so i
opened the gate quietly and went inside.

as i turned to the left to go down a path between some hedges, i heard
a voice quite close to me say,

good morning. how early you are!

i turned around, and there, sitting on the top of a privet hedge, was
the gray parrot, polynesia.

good morning, i said. i suppose i am rather early. is the doctor
still in bed?

oh no, said polynesia. he has been up an hour and a half. youll
find him in the house somewhere. the front door is open. just push it
and go in. he is sure to be in the kitchen cooking breakfastor working
in his study. walk right in. i am waiting to see the sun rise. but
upon my word i believe its forgotten to rise. it is an awful climate,
this. now if we were in africa the world would be blazing with sunlight
at this hour of the morning. just see that mist rolling over those
cabbages. it is enough to give you rheumatism to look at it. beastly
climatebeastly! really i dont know why anything but frogs ever stay
in englandwell, dont let me keep you. run along and see the doctor.

thank you, i said. ill go and look for him.

when i opened the front door i could smell bacon frying, so i made my
way to the kitchen. there i discovered a large kettle boiling away over
the fire and some bacon and eggs in a dish upon the hearth. it seemed
to me that the bacon was getting all dried up with the heat. so i
pulled the dish a little further away from the fire and went on through
the house looking for the doctor.

i found him at last in the study. i did not know then that it was
called the study. it was certainly a very interesting room, with
telescopes and microscopes and all sorts of other strange things which
i did not understand about but wished i did. hanging on the walls were
pictures of animals and fishes and strange plants and collections of
birds eggs and sea-shells in glass cases.

the doctor was standing at the main table in his dressing-gown. at
first i thought he was washing his face. he had a square glass box
before him full of water. he was holding one ear under the water while
he covered the other with his left hand. as i came in he stood up.

good morning, stubbins, said he. going to be a nice day, dont
you think? ive just been listening to the wiff-waff. but he is very
disappointingvery.

why? i said. didnt you find that he has any language at all?

oh yes, said the doctor, he has a language. but it is such a poor
languageonly a few words, like yes and nohot and cold. thats
all he can say. its very disappointing. you see he really belongs
to two different families of fishes. i thought he was going to be
tremendously helpfulwell, well!

i suppose, said i, that means he hasnt very much senseif his
language is only two or three words?

yes, i suppose it does. possibly it is the kind of life he leads.
you see, they are very rare now, these wiff-waffsvery rare and very
solitary. they swim around in the deepest parts of the ocean entirely
by themselvesalways alone. so i presume they really dont need to talk
much.

perhaps some kind of a bigger shellfish would talk more, i said.
after all, he is very small, isnt he?

yes, said the doctor, thats true. oh i have no doubt that there
are shellfish who are good talkersnot the least doubt. but the big
shellfishthe biggest of them, are so hard to catch. they are only to
be found in the deep parts of the sea; and as they dont swim very
much, but just crawl along the floor of the ocean most of the time,
they are very seldom taken in nets. i do wish i could find some way of
going down to the bottom of the sea. i could learn a lot if i could
only do that. but we are forgetting all about breakfasthave you had
breakfast yet, stubbins?

i told the doctor that i had forgotten all about it and he at once led
the way into the kitchen.

yes, he said, as he poured the hot water from the kettle into the
tea-pot, if a man could only manage to get right down to the bottom
of the sea, and live there a while, he would discover some wonderful
thingsthings that people have never dreamed of.

but men do go down, dont they? i askeddivers and people like that?

oh yes, to be sure, said the doctor. divers go down. ive been down
myself in a diving-suit, for that matter. but my!they only go where
the sea is shallow. divers cant go down where it is really deep. what
i would like to do is to go down to the great depthswhere it is miles
deepwell, well, i dare say i shall manage it some day. let me give you
another cup of tea.




_the eighth chapter_

are you a good noticer?


just at that moment polynesia came into the room and said something to
the doctor in bird language. of course i did not understand what it
was. but the doctor at once put down his knife and fork and left the
room.

you know it is an awful shame, said the parrot as soon as the doctor
had closed the door. directly he comes back home, all the animals
over the whole countryside get to hear of it and every sick cat and
mangy rabbit for miles around comes to see him and ask his advice. now
theres a big fat hare outside at the back door with a squawking baby.
can she see the doctor, please!thinks its going to have convulsions.
stupid little things been eating deadly nightshade again, i suppose.
the animals are _so_ inconsiderate at timesespecially the mothers.
they come round and call the doctor away from his meals and wake him
out of his bed at all hours of the night. i dont know how he stands
itreally i dont. why, the poor man never gets any peace at all! ive
told him time and again to have special hours for the animals to come.
but he is so frightfully kind and considerate. he never refuses to see
them if there is anything really wrong with them. he says the urgent
cases must be seen at once.

why dont some of the animals go and see the other doctors? i asked.

oh good gracious! exclaimed the parrot, tossing her head scornfully.
why, there arent any other animal-doctorsnot real doctors. oh of
course there _are_ those vet persons, to be sure. but, bless you,
theyre no good. you see, they cant understand the animals language;
so how can you expect them to be any use? imagine yourself, or your
father, going to see a doctor who could not understand a word you
saynor even tell you in your own language what you must do to get
well! poof!those vets! theyre that stupid, youve no idea!put the
doctors bacon down by the fire, will you?to keep hot till he comes
back.

do you think i would ever be able to learn the language of the
animals? i asked, laying the plate upon the hearth.

well, it all depends, said polynesia. are you clever at lessons?

i dont know, i answered, feeling rather ashamed. you see, ive
never been to school. my father is too poor to send me.

well, said the parrot, i dont suppose you have really missed
muchto judge from what _i_ have seen of school-boys. but listen: are
you a good noticer?do you notice things well? i mean, for instance,
supposing you saw two cock-starlings on an apple-tree, and you only
took one good look at themwould you be able to tell one from the other
if you saw them again the next day?

i dont know, i said. ive never tried.

well that, said polynesia, brushing some crumbs off the corner
of the table with her left footthat is what you call powers of
observationnoticing the small things about birds and animals: the way
they walk and move their heads and flip their wings; the way they sniff
the air and twitch their whiskers and wiggle their tails. you have to
notice all those little things if you want to learn animal language.
for you see, lots of the animals hardly talk at all with their tongues;
they use their breath or their tails or their feet instead. that is
because many of them, in the olden days when lions and tigers were more
plentiful, were afraid to make a noise for fear the savage creatures
heard them. birds, of course, didnt care; for they always had wings to
fly away with. but that is the first thing to remember: being a good
noticer is terribly important in learning animal language.

it sounds pretty hard, i said.

youll have to be very patient, said polynesia. it takes a long
time to say even a few words properly. but if you come here often
ill give you a few lessons myself. and once you get started youll
be surprised how fast you get on. it would indeed be a good thing if
you could learn. because then you could do some of the work for the
doctori mean the easier work, like bandaging and giving pills. yes,
yes, thats a good idea of mine. twould be a great thing if the poor
man could get some helpand some rest. it is a scandal the way he
works. i see no reason why you shouldnt be able to help him a great
dealthat is, if you are really interested in animals.

[illustration: being a good noticer is terribly important]

oh, id love that! i cried. do you think the doctor would let me?

certainly, said polynesiaas soon as you have learned something
about doctoring. ill speak of it to him myselfsh! i hear him coming.
quickbring his bacon back on to the table.




_the ninth chapter_

the garden of dreams


when breakfast was over the doctor took me out to show me the garden.
well, if the house had been interesting, the garden was a hundred
times more so. of all the gardens i have ever seen that was the most
delightful, the most fascinating. at first you did not realize how big
it was. you never seemed to come to the end of it. when at last you
were quite sure that you had seen it all, you would peer over a hedge,
or turn a corner, or look up some steps, and there was a whole new part
you never expected to find.

it had everythingeverything a garden can have, or ever has had. there
were wide, wide lawns with carved stone seats, green with moss. over
the lawns hung weeping-willows, and their feathery bough-tips brushed
the velvet grass when they swung with the wind. the old flagged paths
had high, clipped, yew hedges either side of them, so that they looked
like the narrow streets of some old town; and through the hedges,
doorways had been made; and over the doorways were shapes like vases
and peacocks and half-moons all trimmed out of the living trees. there
was a lovely marble fish-pond with golden carp and blue water-lilies in
it and big green frogs. a high brick wall alongside the kitchen garden
was all covered with pink and yellow peaches ripening in the sun. there
was a wonderful great oak, hollow in the trunk, big enough for four men
to hide inside. many summer-houses there were, toosome of wood and
some of stone; and one of them was full of books to read. in a corner,
among some rocks and ferns, was an outdoor fire-place, where the doctor
used to fry liver and bacon when he had a notion to take his meals in
the open air. there was a couch as well on which he used to sleep, it
seems, on warm summer nights when the nightingales were singing at
their best; it had wheels on it so it could be moved about under any
tree they sang in. but the thing that fascinated me most of all was a
tiny little tree-house, high up in the top branches of a great elm,
with a long rope ladder leading to it. the doctor told me he used it
for looking at the moon and the stars through a telescope.

it was the kind of a garden where you could wander and explore for days
and daysalways coming upon something new, always glad to find the old
spots over again. that first time that i saw the doctors garden i was
so charmed by it that i felt i would like to live in italways and
alwaysand never go outside of it again. for it had everything within
its walls to give happiness, to make living pleasantto keep the heart
at peace. it was the garden of dreams.

one peculiar thing i noticed immediately i came into it; and that was
what a lot of birds there were about. every tree seemed to have two or
three nests in it. and heaps of other wild creatures appeared to be
making themselves at home there, too. stoats and tortoises and dormice
seemed to be quite common, and not in the least shy. toads of different
colors and sizes hopped about the lawn as though it belonged to them.
green lizards (which were very rare in puddleby) sat up on the stones
in the sunlight and blinked at us. even snakes were to be seen.

you need not be afraid of them, said the doctor, noticing that i
started somewhat when a large black snake wiggled across the path right
in front of us. these fellows are not poisonous. they do a great deal
of good in keeping down many kinds of garden-pests. i play the flute to
them sometimes in the evening. they love it. stand right up on their
tails and carry on no end. funny thing, their taste for music.

why do all these animals come and live here? i asked. i never saw a
garden with so many creatures in it.

well, i suppose its because they get the kind of food they like; and
nobody worries or disturbs them. and then, of course, they know me. and
if they or their children get sick i presume they find it handy to be
living in a doctors gardenlook! you see that sparrow on the sundial,
swearing at the blackbird down below? well, he has been coming here
every summer for years. he comes from london. the country sparrows
round about here are always laughing at him. they say he chirps with
such a cockney accent. he is a most amusing birdvery brave but very
cheeky. he loves nothing better than an argument, but he always ends it
by getting rude. he is a real city bird. in london he lives around st.
pauls cathedral. cheapside, we call him.

are all these birds from the country round here? i asked.

most of them, said the doctor. but a few rare ones visit me every
year who ordinarily never come near england at all. for instance,
that handsome little fellow hovering over the snapdragon there, hes
a ruby-throated humming-bird. comes from america. strictly speaking,
he has no business in this climate at all. it is too cool. i make him
sleep in the kitchen at night. then every august, about the last week
of the month, i have a purple bird-of-paradise come all the way from
brazil to see me. she is a very great swell. hasnt arrived yet of
course. and there are a few others, foreign birds from the tropics
mostly, who drop in on me in the course of the summer months. but come,
i must show you the zoo.




_the tenth chapter_

the private zoo


i did not think there could be anything left in that garden which we
had not seen. but the doctor took me by the arm and started off down a
little narrow path and after many windings and twistings and turnings
we found ourselves before a small door in a high stone wall. the doctor
pushed it open.

inside was still another garden. i had expected to find cages with
animals inside them. but there were none to be seen. instead there were
little stone houses here and there all over the garden; and each house
had a window and a door. as we walked in, many of these doors opened
and animals came running out to us evidently expecting food.

havent the doors any locks on them? i asked the doctor.

oh yes, he said, every door has a lock. but in my zoo the doors open
from the inside, not from the out. the locks are only there so the
animals can go and shut themselves _in_ any time they want to get away
from the annoyance of other animals or from people who might come here.
every animal in this zoo stays here because he likes it, not because
he is made to.

they all look very happy and clean, i said. would you mind telling
me the names of some of them?

certainly. well now: that funny-looking thing with plates on his back,
nosing under the brick over there, is a south american armadillo. the
little chap talking to him is a canadian woodchuck. they both live in
those holes you see at the foot of the wall. the two little beasts
doing antics in the pond are a pair of russian minksand that reminds
me: i must go and get them some herrings from the town before noonit
is early-closing to-day. that animal just stepping out of his house is
an antelope, one of the smaller south african kinds. now let us move to
the other side of those bushes there and i will show you some more.

are those deer over there? i asked.

_deer!_ said the doctor. where do you mean?

over there, i said, pointingnibbling the grass border of the bed.
there are two of them.

oh, that, said the doctor with a smile. that isnt two animals:
thats one animal with two headsthe only two-headed animal in the
world. its called the pushmi-pullyu. i brought him from africa. hes
very tameacts as a kind of night-watchman for my zoo. he only sleeps
with one head at a time, you seevery handythe other head stays awake
all night.

have you any lions or tigers? i asked as we moved on.

no, said the doctor. it wouldnt be possible to keep them hereand
i wouldnt keep them even if i could. if i had my way, stubbins, there
wouldnt be a single lion or tiger in captivity anywhere in the world.
they never take to it. theyre never happy. they never settle down.
they are always thinking of the big countries they have left behind.
you can see it in their eyes, dreamingdreaming always of the great
open spaces where they were born; dreaming of the deep, dark jungles
where their mothers first taught them how to scent and track the deer.
and what are they given in exchange for all this? asked the doctor,
stopping in his walk and growing all red and angrywhat are they given
in exchange for the glory of an african sunrise, for the twilight
breeze whispering through the palms, for the green shade of the matted,
tangled vines, for the cool, big-starred nights of the desert, for the
patter of the waterfall after a hard days hunt? what, i ask you, are
they given in exchange for _these_? why, a bare cage with iron bars; an
ugly piece of dead meat thrust in to them once a day; and a crowd of
fools to come and stare at them with open mouths!no, stubbins. lions
and tigers, the big hunters, should never, never be seen in zoos.

the doctor seemed to have grown terribly seriousalmost sad. but
suddenly his manner changed again and he took me by the arm with his
same old cheerful smile.

but we havent seen the butterfly-houses yetnor the aquariums. come
along. i am very proud of my butterfly-houses.

off we went again and came presently into a hedged enclosure. here i
saw several big huts made of fine wire netting, like cages. inside the
netting all sorts of beautiful flowers were growing in the sun, with
butterflies skimming over them. the doctor pointed to the end of one of
the huts where little boxes with holes in them stood in a row.

those are the hatching-boxes, said he. there i put the different
kinds of caterpillars. and as soon as they turn into butterflies and
moths they come out into these flower-gardens to feed.

do butterflies have a language? i asked.

oh i fancy they have, said the doctorand the beetles too. but so
far i havent succeeded in learning much about insect languages. i have
been too busy lately trying to master the shellfish-talk. i mean to
take it up though.

at that moment polynesia joined us and said, doctor, there are two
guinea-pigs at the back door. they say they have run away from the boy
who kept them because they didnt get the right stuff to eat. they want
to know if you will take them in.

all right, said the doctor. show them the way to the zoo. give them
the house on the left, near the gatethe one the black fox had. tell
them what the rules are and give them a square mealnow, stubbins, we
will go on to the aquariums. and first of all i must show you my big,
glass, sea-water tank where i keep the shellfish.




_the eleventh chapter_

my schoolmaster, polynesia


well, there were not many days after that, you may be sure, when i did
not come to see my new friend. indeed i was at his house practically
all day and every day. so that one evening my mother asked me jokingly
why i did not take my bed over there and live at the doctors house
altogether.

after a while i think i got to be quite useful to the doctor, feeding
his pets for him; helping to make new houses and fences for the zoo;
assisting with the sick animals that came; doing all manner of odd jobs
about the place. so that although i enjoyed it all very much (it was
indeed like living in a new world) i really think the doctor would have
missed me if i had not come so often.

and all this time polynesia came with me wherever i went, teaching me
bird language and showing me how to understand the talking signs of the
animals. at first i thought i would never be able to learn at allit
seemed so difficult. but the old parrot was wonderfully patient with
methough i could see that occasionally she had hard work to keep her
temper.

soon i began to pick up the strange chatter of the birds and to
understand the funny talking antics of the dogs. i used to practise
listening to the mice behind the wainscot after i went to bed, and
watching the cats on the roofs and pigeons in the market-square of
puddleby.

and the days passed very quicklyas they always do when life is
pleasant; and the days turned into weeks, and weeks into months; and
soon the roses in the doctors garden were losing their petals and
yellow leaves lay upon the wide green lawn. for the summer was nearly
gone.

one day polynesia and i were talking in the library. this was a fine
long room with a grand mantlepiece and the walls were covered from the
ceiling to the floor with shelves full of books: books of stories,
books on gardening, books about medicine, books of travel; these i
lovedand especially the doctors great atlas with all its maps of the
different countries of the world.

this afternoon polynesia was showing me the books about animals which
john dolittle had written himself.

my! i said, what a lot of books the doctor hasall the way around
the room! goodness! i wish i could read! it must be tremendously
interesting. can you read, polynesia?

only a little, said she. be careful how you turn those pagesdont
tear them. no, i really dont get time enough for readingmuch. that
letter there is a _k_ and this is a _b_.

what does this word under the picture mean? i asked.

let me see, she said, and started spelling it out.
b-a-b-o-o-nthats _monkey_. reading isnt nearly as hard as it looks,
once you know the letters.

polynesia, i said, i want to ask you something very important.

what is it, my boy? said she, smoothing down the feathers of her
right wing. polynesia often spoke to me in a very patronizing way. but
i did not mind it from her. after all, she was nearly two hundred years
old; and i was only ten.

listen, i said, my mother doesnt think it is right that i come
here for so many meals. and i was going to ask you: supposing i did a
whole lot more work for the doctorwhy couldnt i come and live here
altogether? you see, instead of being paid like a regular gardener or
workman, i would get my bed and meals in exchange for the work i did.
what do you think?

you mean you want to be a proper assistant to the doctor, is that it?

yes. i suppose thats what you call it, i answered. you know you
said yourself that you thought i could be very useful to him.

wellshe thought a momenti really dont see why not. but is this
what you want to be when you grow up, a naturalist?

yes, i said, i have made up my mind. i would sooner be a naturalist
than anything else in the world.

humph!lets go and speak to the doctor about it, said polynesia.
hes in the next roomin the study. open the door very gentlyhe may
be working and not want to be disturbed.

i opened the door quietly and peeped in. the first thing i saw was an
enormous black retriever dog sitting in the middle of the hearth-rug
with his ears cocked up, listening to the doctor who was reading aloud
to him from a letter.

what _is_ the doctor doing? i asked polynesia in a whisper.

oh, the dog has had a letter from his mistress and he has brought it
to the doctor to read for him. thats all. he belongs to a funny little
girl called minnie dooley, who lives on the other side of the town. she
has pigtails down her back. she and her brother have gone away to the
seaside for the summer; and the old retriever is heart-broken while the
children are gone. so they write letters to himin english of course.
and as the old dog doesnt understand them, he brings them here,
and the doctor turns them into dog language for him. i think minnie
must have written that she is coming backto judge from the dogs
excitement. just look at him carrying on!

indeed the retriever seemed to be suddenly overcome with joy. as the
doctor finished the letter the old dog started barking at the top of
his voice, wagging his tail wildly and jumping about the study. he
took the letter in his mouth and ran out of the room snorting hard and
mumbling to himself.

hes going down to meet the coach, whispered polynesia. that dogs
devotion to those children is more than i can understand. you should
see minnie! shes the most conceited little minx that ever walked. she
squints too.




_the twelfth chapter_

my great idea


presently the doctor looked up and saw us at the door.

ohcome in, stubbins, said he, did you wish to speak to me? come in
and take a chair.

doctor, i said, i want to be a naturalistlike youwhen i grow up.

oh you do, do you? murmured the doctor. humph!well!dear me!you
dont say!well, well! have you erhave you spoken to your mother and
father about it?

no, not yet, i said. i want you to speak to them for me. you would
do it better. i want to be your helperyour assistant, if youll have
me. last night my mother was saying that she didnt consider it right
for me to come here so often for meals. and ive been thinking about it
a good deal since. couldnt we make some arrangementcouldnt i work
for my meals and sleep here?

but my dear stubbins, said the doctor, laughing, you are quite
welcome to come here for three meals a day all the year round. im only
too glad to have you. besides, you do do a lot of work, as it is. ive
often felt that i ought to pay you for what you dobut what arrangement
was it that you thought of?

well, i thought, said i, that perhaps you would come and see my
mother and father and tell them that if they let me live here with you
and work hard, that you will teach me to read and write. you see my
mother is awfully anxious to have me learn reading and writing. and
besides, i couldnt be a proper naturalist without, could i?

oh, i dont know so much about that, said the doctor. it is nice, i
admit, to be able to read and write. but naturalists are not all alike,
you know. for example: this young fellow charles darwin that people are
talking about so much nowhes a cambridge graduatereads and writes
very well. and then cuvierhe used to be a tutor. but listen, the
greatest naturalist of them all doesnt even know how to write his own
name nor to read the _a b c_.

who is he? i asked.

he is a mysterious person, said the doctora very mysterious person.
his name is long arrow, the son of golden arrow. he is a red indian.

have you ever seen him? i asked.

no, said the doctor, ive never seen him. no white man has ever met
him. i fancy mr. darwin doesnt even know that he exists. he lives
almost entirely with the animals and with the different tribes of
indiansusually somewhere among the mountains of peru. never stays long
in one place. goes from tribe to tribe, like a sort of indian tramp.

how do you know so much about him? i askedif youve never even seen
him?

the purple bird-of-paradise, said the doctorshe told me all about
him. she says he is a perfectly marvelous naturalist. i got her to take
a message to him for me last time she was here. i am expecting her back
any day now. i can hardly wait to see what answer she has brought from
him. it is already almost the last week of august. i do hope nothing
has happened to her on the way.

but why do the animals and birds come to you when they are sick? i
saidwhy dont they go to him, if he is so very wonderful?

it seems that my methods are more up to date, said the doctor. but
from what the purple bird-of-paradise tells me, long arrows knowledge
of natural history must be positively tremendous. his specialty is
botanyplants and all that sort of thing. but he knows a lot about
birds and animals too. hes very good on bees and beetlesbut now
tell me, stubbins, are you quite sure that you really want to be a
naturalist?

yes, said i, my mind is made up.

well you know, it isnt a very good profession for making money. not
at all, it isnt. most of the good naturalists dont make any money
whatever. all they do is _spend_ money, buying butterfly-nets and
cases for birds eggs and things. it is only now, after i have been a
naturalist for many years, that i am beginning to make a little money
from the books i write.

i dont care about money, i said. i want to be a naturalist.
wont you please come and have dinner with my mother and father next
thursdayi told them i was going to ask youand then you can talk to
them about it. you see, theres another thing: if im living with you,
and sort of belong to your house and business, i shall be able to come
with you next time you go on a voyage.

oh, i see, said he, smiling. so you want to come on a voyage with
me, do you?ah hah!

i want to go on all your voyages with you. it would be much easier
for you if you had someone to carry the butterfly-nets and note-books.
wouldnt it now?

for a long time the doctor sat thinking, drumming on the desk with his
fingers, while i waited, terribly impatiently, to see what he was going
to say.

at last he shrugged his shoulders and stood up.

well, stubbins, said he, ill come and talk it over with you and
your parents next thursday. andwell, well see. well see. give your
mother and father my compliments and thank them for their invitation,
will you?

then i tore home like the wind to tell my mother that the doctor had
promised to come.




_the thirteenth chapter_

a traveler arrives


the next day i was sitting on the wall of the doctors garden after
tea, talking to dab-dab. i had now learned so much from polynesia that
i could talk to most birds and some animals without a great deal of
difficulty. i found dab-dab a very nice, old, motherly birdthough not
nearly so clever and interesting as polynesia. she had been housekeeper
for the doctor many years now.

well, as i was saying, the old duck and i were sitting on the flat top
of the garden-wall that evening, looking down into the oxenthorpe road
below. we were watching some sheep being driven to market in puddleby;
and dab-dab had just been telling me about the doctors adventures in
africa. for she had gone on a voyage with him to that country long ago.

suddenly i heard a curious distant noise down the road, towards the
town. it sounded like a lot of people cheering. i stood up on the wall
to see if i could make out what was coming. presently there appeared
round a bend a great crowd of school-children following a very ragged,
curious-looking woman.

what in the world can it be? cried dab-dab.

the children were all laughing and shouting. and certainly the woman
they were following was most extraordinary. she had very long arms and
the most stooping shoulders i have ever seen. she wore a straw hat on
the side of her head with poppies on it; and her skirt was so long for
her it dragged on the ground like a ball-gowns train. i could not see
anything of her face because of the wide hat pulled over her eyes. but
as she got nearer to us and the laughing of the children grew louder,
i noticed that her hands were very dark in color, and hairy, like a
witchs.

then all of a sudden dab-dab at my side startled me by crying out in a
loud voice,

why, its chee-chee!chee-chee come back at last! how dare those
children tease him! ill give the little imps something to laugh at!

and she flew right off the wall down into the road and made straight
for the children, squawking away in a most terrifying fashion and
pecking at their feet and legs. the children made off down the street
back to the town as hard as they could run.

the strange-looking figure in the straw hat stood gazing after them a
moment and then came wearily up to the gate. it didnt bother to undo
the latch but just climbed right over the gate as though it were
something in the way. and then i noticed that it took hold of the bars
with its feet, so that it really had four hands to climb with. but it
was only when i at last got a glimpse of the face under the hat that i
could be really sure it was a monkey.

[illustration: a traveler arrives]

chee-cheefor it was hefrowned at me suspiciously from the top of the
gate, as though he thought i was going to laugh at him like the other
boys and girls. then he dropped into the garden on the inside and
immediately started taking off his clothes. he tore the straw hat in
two and threw it down into the road. then he took off his bodice and
skirt, jumped on them savagely and began kicking them round the front
garden.

presently i heard a screech from the house, and out flew polynesia,
followed by the doctor and jip.

chee-chee!chee-chee! shouted the parrot. youve come at last! i
always told the doctor youd find a way. how ever did you do it?

they all gathered round him shaking him by his four hands, laughing and
asking him a million questions at once. then they all started back for
the house.

run up to my bedroom, stubbins, said the doctor, turning to me.
youll find a bag of peanuts in the small left-hand drawer of the
bureau. i have always kept them there in case he might come back
unexpectedly some day. and wait a minutesee if dab-dab has any bananas
in the pantry. chee-chee hasnt had a banana, he tells me, in two
months.

when i came down again to the kitchen i found everybody listening
attentively to the monkey who was telling the story of his journey from
africa.




_the fourteenth chapter_

chee-chees voyage


it seems that after polynesia had left, chee-chee had grown more
homesick than ever for the doctor and the little house in puddleby. at
last he had made up his mind that by hook or crook he would follow her.
and one day, going down to the seashore, he saw a lot of people, black
and white, getting on to a ship that was coming to england. he tried to
get on too. but they turned him back and drove him away. and presently
he noticed a whole big family of funny people passing on to the ship.
and one of the children in this family reminded chee-chee of a cousin
of his with whom he had once been in love. so he said to himself, that
girl looks just as much like a monkey as i look like a girl. if i
could only get some clothes to wear i might easily slip on to the ship
amongst these families, and people would take me for a girl. good idea!

so he went off to a town that was quite close, and hopping in through
an open window he found a skirt and bodice lying on a chair. they
belonged to a fashionable black lady who was taking a bath. chee-chee
put them on. next he went back to the seashore, mingled with the crowd
there and at last sneaked safely on to the big ship. then he thought he
had better hide, for fear people might look at him too closely. and he
stayed hidden all the time the ship was sailing to englandonly coming
out at night, when everybody was asleep, to find food.

when he reached england and tried to get off the ship, the sailors saw
at last that he was only a monkey dressed up in girls clothes; and
they wanted to keep him for a pet. but he managed to give them the
slip; and once he was on shore, he dived into the crowd and got away.
but he was still a long distance from puddleby and had to come right
across the whole breadth of england.

he had a terrible time of it. whenever he passed through a town all the
children ran after him in a crowd, laughing; and often silly people
caught hold of him and tried to stop him, so that he had to run up
lamp-posts and climb to chimney-pots to escape from them. at night
he used to sleep in ditches or barns or anywhere he could hide; and
he lived on the berries he picked from the hedges and the cob-nuts
that grew in the copses. at length, after many adventures and narrow
squeaks, he saw the tower of puddleby church and he knew that at last
he was near his old home.

when chee-chee had finished his story he ate six bananas without
stopping and drank a whole bowlful of milk.

my! he said, why wasnt i born with wings, like polynesia, so i
could fly here? youve no idea how i grew to hate that hat and skirt.
ive never been so uncomfortable in my life. all the way from bristol
here, if the wretched hat wasnt falling off my head or catching in the
trees, those beastly skirts were tripping me up and getting wound round
everything. what on earth do women wear those things for? goodness, i
was glad to see old puddleby this morning when i climbed over the hill
by bellabys farm!

your bed on top of the plate-rack in the scullery is all ready for
you, said the doctor. we never had it disturbed in case you might
come back.

yes, said dab-dab, and you can have the old smoking-jacket of the
doctors which you used to use as a blanket, in case it is cold in the
night.

thanks, said chee-chee. its good to be back in the old house again.
everythings just the same as when i leftexcept the clean roller-towel
on the back of the door therethats newwell, i think ill go to bed
now. i need sleep.

then we all went out of the kitchen into the scullery and watched
chee-chee climb the plate-rack like a sailor going up a mast. on the
top, he curled himself up, pulled the old smoking-jacket over him, and
in a minute he was snoring peacefully.

good old chee-chee! whispered the doctor. im glad hes back.

yesgood old chee-chee! echoed dab-dab and polynesia.

then we all tip-toed out of the scullery and closed the door very
gently behind us.




_the fifteenth chapter_

i become a doctors assistant


when thursday evening came there was great excitement at our house.
my mother had asked me what were the doctors favorite dishes, and i
had told her: spare ribs, sliced beet-root, fried bread, shrimps and
treacle-tart. to-night she had them all on the table waiting for him;
and she was now fussing round the house to see if everything was tidy
and in readiness for his coming.

at last we heard a knock upon the door, and of course it was i who got
there first to let him in.

the doctor had brought his own flute with him this time. and after
supper was over (which he enjoyed very much) the table was cleared away
and the washing-up left in the kitchen-sink till the next day. then the
doctor and my father started playing duets.

they got so interested in this that i began to be afraid that they
would never come to talking over my business. but at last the doctor
said,

your son tells me that he is anxious to become a naturalist.

and then began a long talk which lasted far into the night. at first
both my mother and father were rather against the ideaas they had been
from the beginning. they said it was only a boyish whim, and that i
would get tired of it very soon. but after the matter had been talked
over from every side, the doctor turned to my father and said,

well now, supposing, mr. stubbins, that your son came to me for two
yearsthat is, until he is twelve years old. during those two years he
will have time to see if he is going to grow tired of it or not. also
during that time, i will promise to teach him reading and writing and
perhaps a little arithmetic as well. what do you say to that?

i dont know, said my father, shaking his head. you are very kind
and it is a handsome offer you make, doctor. but i feel that tommy
ought to be learning some trade by which he can earn his living later
on.

then my mother spoke up. although she was nearly in tears at the
prospect of my leaving her house while i was still so young, she
pointed out to my father that this was a grand chance for me to get
learning.

now jacob, she said, you know that many lads in the town have been
to the grammar school till they were fourteen or fifteen years old.
tommy can easily spare these two years for his education; and if he
learns no more than to read and write, the time will not be lost.
though goodness knows, she added, getting out her handkerchief to cry,
the house will seem terribly empty when hes gone.

i will take care that he comes to see you, mrs. stubbins, said the
doctorevery day, if you like. after all, he will not be very far
away.

well, at length my father gave in; and it was agreed that i was to live
with the doctor and work for him for two years in exchange for learning
to read and write and for my board and lodging.

of course, added the doctor, while i have money i will keep tommy in
clothes as well. but money is a very irregular thing with me; sometimes
i have some, and then sometimes i havent.

you are very good, doctor, said my mother, drying her tears. it
seems to me that tommy is a very fortunate boy.

and then, thoughtless, selfish little imp that i was, i leaned over and
whispered in the doctors ear,

please dont forget to say something about the voyages.

oh, by the way, said john dolittle, of course occasionally my work
requires me to travel. you will have no objection, i take it, to your
sons coming with me?

my poor mother looked up sharply, more unhappy and anxious than ever
at this new turn; while i stood behind the doctors chair, my heart
thumping with excitement, waiting for my fathers answer.

no, he said slowly after a while. if we agree to the other
arrangement i dont see that weve the right to make any objection to
that.

well, there surely was never a happier boy in the world than i was at
that moment. my head was in the clouds. i trod on air. i could scarcely
keep from dancing round the parlor. at last the dream of my life was to
come true! at last i was to be given a chance to seek my fortune, to
have adventures! for i knew perfectly well that it was now almost time
for the doctor to start upon another voyage. polynesia had told me that
he hardly ever stayed at home for more than six months at a stretch.
therefore he would be surely going again within a fortnight. and ii,
tommy stubbins, would go with him! just to think of it!to cross the
sea, to walk on foreign shores, to roam the world!

[illustration]




part two

_the first chapter_

the crew of the curlew


from that time on of course my position in the town was very different.
i was no longer a poor cobblers son. i carried my nose in the air as
i went down the high street with jip in his gold collar at my side;
and snobbish little boys who had despised me before because i was not
rich enough to go to school now pointed me out to their friends and
whispered, you see him? hes a doctors assistantand only ten years
old!

but their eyes would have opened still wider with wonder if they had
but known that i and the dog that was with me could talk to one another.

two days after the doctor had been to our house to dinner he told me
very sadly that he was afraid that he would have to give up trying to
learn the language of the shellfishat all events for the present.

im very discouraged, stubbins, very. ive tried the mussels and
the clams, the oysters and the whelks, cockles and scallops; seven
different kinds of crabs and all the lobster family. i think ill
leave it for the present and go at it again later on.

what will you turn to now? i asked.

well, i rather thought of going on a voyage, stubbins. its quite
a time now since ive been away. and there is a great deal of work
waiting for me abroad.

when shall we start? i asked.

well, first i shall have to wait till the purple bird-of-paradise gets
here. i must see if she has any message for me from long arrow. shes
late. she should have been here ten days ago. i hope to goodness shes
all right.

well, hadnt we better be seeing about getting a boat? i said. she
is sure to be here in a day or so; and there will be lots of things to
do to get ready in the mean time, wont there?

yes, indeed, said the doctor. suppose we go down and see your friend
joe, the mussel-man. he will know about boats.

id like to come too, said jip.

all right, come along, said the doctor, and off we went.

joe said yes, he had a boatone he had just boughtbut it needed three
people to sail her. we told him we would like to see it anyway.

so the mussel-man took us off a little way down the river and showed
us the neatest, prettiest, little vessel that ever was built. she was
called _the curlew_. joe said he would sell her to us cheap. but the
trouble was that the boat needed three people, while we were only two.

of course i shall be taking chee-chee, said the doctor. but although
he is very quick and clever, he is not as strong as a man. we really
ought to have another person to sail a boat as big as that.

i know of a good sailor, doctor, said joea first-class seaman who
would be glad of the job.

no, thank you, joe, said doctor dolittle. i dont want any seamen.
i couldnt afford to hire them. and then they hamper me so, seamen do,
when im at sea. theyre always wanting to do things the proper way;
and i like to do them _my_ waynow let me see: who could we take with
us?

theres matthew mugg, the cats-meat-man, i said.

no, he wouldnt do. matthews a very nice fellow, but he talks too
muchmostly about his rheumatism. you have to be frightfully particular
whom you take with you on long voyages.

how about luke the hermit? i asked.

thats a good ideasplendidif hell come. lets go and ask him right
away.




_the second chapter_

luke the hermit


the hermit was an old friend of ours, as i have already told you. he
was a very peculiar person. far out on the marshes he lived in a little
bit of a shackall alone except for his brindle bulldog. no one knew
where he came fromnot even his name. just luke the hermit folks
called him. he never came into the town; never seemed to want to see
or talk to people. his dog, bob, drove them away if they came near his
hut. when you asked anyone in puddleby who he was or why he lived out
in that lonely place by himself, the only answer you got was, oh, luke
the hermit? well, theres some mystery about him. nobody knows what it
is. but theres a mystery. dont go near him. hell set the dog on you.

nevertheless there were two people who often went out to that little
shack on the fens: the doctor and myself. and bob, the bulldog, never
barked when he heard us coming. for we liked luke; and luke liked us.

this afternoon, crossing the marshes we faced a cold wind blowing from
the east. as we approached the hut jip put up his ears and said,

thats funny!

whats funny? asked the doctor.

that bob hasnt come out to meet us. he should have heard us long
agoor smelt us. whats that queer noise?

sounds to me like a gate creaking, said the doctor. maybe its
lukes door, only we cant see the door from here; its on the far side
of the shack.

i hope bob isnt sick, said jip; and he let out a bark to see if that
would call him. but the only answer he got was the wailing of the wind
across the wide, salt fen.

we hurried forward, all three of us thinking hard.

when we reached the front of the shack we found the door open, swinging
and creaking dismally in the wind. we looked inside. there was no one
there.

isnt luke at home then? said i. perhaps hes out for a walk.

he is _always_ at home, said the doctor frowning in a peculiar sort
of way. and even if he were out for a walk he wouldnt leave his
door banging in the wind behind him. there is something queer about
thiswhat are you doing in there, jip?

nothing muchnothing worth speaking of, said jip examining the floor
of the hut extremely carefully.

come here, jip, said the doctor in a stern voice. you are hiding
something from me. you see signs and you know somethingor you guess
it. what has happened? tell me. where is the hermit?

i dont know, said jip looking very guilty and uncomfortable. i
dont know where he is.

well, you know something. i can tell it from the look in your eye.
what is it?

but jip didnt answer.

for ten minutes the doctor kept questioning him. but not a word would
the dog say.

well, said the doctor at last, it is no use our standing around here
in the cold. the hermits gone. thats all. we might as well go home to
luncheon.

as we buttoned up our coats and started back across the marsh, jip ran
ahead pretending he was looking for water-rats.

he knows something all right, whispered the doctor. and i think he
knows what has happened too. its funny, his not wanting to tell me. he
has never done that beforenot in eleven years. he has always told me
everythingstrangevery strange!

do you mean you think he knows all about the hermit, the big mystery
about him which folks hint at and all that?

i shouldnt wonder if he did, the doctor answered slowly. i noticed
something in his expression the moment we found that door open and the
hut empty. and the way he sniffed the floor tooit told him something,
that floor did. he saw signs we couldnt seei wonder why he wont tell
me. ill try him again. here, jip! jip!where is the dog? i thought he
went on in front.

so did i, i said. he was there a moment ago. i saw him as large as
life. jipjipjipjip!

but he was gone. we called and called. we even walked back to the hut.
but jip had disappeared.

oh well, i said, most likely he has just run home ahead of us. he
often does that, you know. well find him there when we get back to the
house.

but the doctor just closed his coat-collar tighter against the wind and
strode on muttering, oddvery odd!




_the third chapter_

jip and the secret


when we reached the house the first question the doctor asked of
dab-dab in the hall was,

is jip home yet?

no, said dab-dab, i havent seen him.

let me know the moment he comes in, will you, please? said the
doctor, hanging up his hat.

certainly i will, said dab-dab. dont be long over washing your
hands; the lunch is on the table.

just as we were sitting down to luncheon in the kitchen we heard a
great racket at the front door. i ran and opened it. in bounded jip.

doctor! he cried, come into the library quick. ive got something
to tell youno, dab-dab, the luncheon must wait. please hurry, doctor.
theres not a moment to be lost. dont let any of the animals comejust
you and tommy.

now, he said, when we were inside the library and the door was
closed, turn the key in the lock and make sure theres no one
listening under the windows.

its all right, said the doctor. nobody can hear you here. now what
is it?

well, doctor, said jip (he was badly out of breath from running), i
know all about the hermiti have known for years. but i couldnt tell
you.

why? asked the doctor.

because id promised not to tell any one. it was bob, his dog, that
told me. and i swore to him that i would keep the secret.

well, and are you going to tell me now?

yes, said jip, weve got to save him. i followed bobs scent just
now when i left you out there on the marshes. and i found him. and i
said to him, is it all right, i said, for me to tell the doctor now?
maybe he can do something. and bob says to me, yes, says he, its
all right because

oh, for heavens sake, go on, go on! cried the doctor. tell us what
the mystery isnot what you said to bob and what bob said to you. what
has happened? where _is_ the hermit?

hes in puddleby jail, said jip. hes in prison.

in prison!

yes.

what for?whats he done?

jip went over to the door and smelt at the bottom of it to see if any
one were listening outside. then he came back to the doctor on tiptoe
and whispered,

_he killed a man!_

lord preserve us! cried the doctor, sitting down heavily in a chair
and mopping his forehead with a handkerchief. when did he do it?

fifteen years agoin a mexican gold-mine. thats why he has been a
hermit ever since. he shaved off his beard and kept away from people
out there on the marshes so he wouldnt be recognized. but last week,
it seems these new-fangled policemen came to town; and they heard there
was a strange man who kept to himself all alone in a shack on the
fen. and they got suspicious. for a long time people had been hunting
all over the world for the man that did that killing in the mexican
gold-mine fifteen years ago. so these policemen went out to the shack,
and they recognized luke by a mole on his arm. and they took him to
prison.

well, well! murmured the doctor. who would have thought it?luke,
the philosopher!killed a man!i can hardly believe it.

its true enoughunfortunately, said jip. luke did it. but it
wasnt his fault. bob says so. and he was there and saw it all. he was
scarcely more than a puppy at the time. bob says luke couldnt help it.
he _had_ to do it.

where is bob now? asked the doctor.

down at the prison. i wanted him to come with me here to see you; but
he wont leave the prison while luke is there. he just sits outside the
door of the prison-cell and wont move. he doesnt even eat the food
they give him. wont you please come down there, doctor, and see if
there is anything you can do? the trial is to be this afternoon at two
oclock. what time is it now?

its ten minutes past one.

bob says he thinks they are going to kill luke for a punishment if
they can prove that he did itor certainly keep him in prison for the
rest of his life. wont you please come? perhaps if you spoke to the
judge and told him what a good man luke really is theyd let him off.

of course ill come, said the doctor getting up and moving to go.
but im very much afraid that i shant be of any real help. he turned
at the door and hesitated thoughtfully.

and yeti wonder

then he opened the door and passed out with jip and me close at his
heels.




_the fourth chapter_

bob


dab-dab was terribly upset when she found we were going away again
without luncheon; and she made us take some cold pork-pies in our
pockets to eat on the way.

when we got to puddleby court-house (it was next door to the prison),
we found a great crowd gathered around the building.

this was the week of the assizesa business which happened every three
months, when many pick-pockets and other bad characters were tried by
a very grand judge who came all the way from london. and anybody in
puddleby who had nothing special to do used to come to the court-house
to hear the trials.

but to-day it was different. the crowd was not made up of just a few
idle people. it was enormous. the news had run through the countryside
that luke the hermit was to be tried for killing a man and that the
great mystery which had hung over him so long was to be cleared up
at last. the butcher and the baker had closed their shops and taken
a holiday. all the farmers from round-about, and all the townsfolk,
were there with their sunday clothes on, trying to get seats in the
court-house or gossipping outside in low whispers. the high street was
so crowded you could hardly move along it. i had never seen the quiet
old town in such a state of excitement before. for puddleby had not had
such an assizes since 1799, when ferdinand phipps, the rectors oldest
son, had robbed the bank.

if i hadnt had the doctor with me i am sure i would never have been
able to make my way through the mob packed around the court-house door.
but i just followed behind him, hanging on to his coat-tails; and at
last we got safely into the jail.

i want to see luke, said the doctor to a very grand person in a blue
coat with brass buttons standing at the door.

ask at the superintendents office, said the man. third door on the
left down the corridor.

who is that person you spoke to, doctor? i asked as we went along the
passage.

he is a policeman.

and what are policemen?

policemen? they are to keep people in order. theyve just been
inventedby sir robert peel. thats why they are also called peelers
sometimes. it is a wonderful age we live in. theyre always thinking of
something newthis will be the superintendents office, i suppose.

[illustration: on the bed sat the hermit]

from there another policeman was sent with us to show us the way.

outside the door of lukes cell we found bob, the bulldog, who wagged
his tail sadly when he saw us. the man who was guiding us took a large
bunch of keys from his pocket and opened the door.

i had never been inside a real prison-cell before; and i felt quite
a thrill when the policeman went out and locked the door after him,
leaving us shut in the dimly-lighted, little, stone room. before he
went, he said that as soon as we had done talking with our friend we
should knock upon the door and he would come and let us out.

at first i could hardly see anything, it was so dim inside. but after
a little i made out a low bed against the wall, under a small barred
window. on the bed, staring down at the floor between his feet, sat the
hermit, his head resting in his hands.

well, luke, said the doctor in a kindly voice, they dont give you
much light in here, do they?

very slowly the hermit looked up from the floor.

hulloa, john dolittle. what brings you here?

ive come to see you. i would have been here sooner, only i didnt
hear about all this till a few minutes ago. i went to your hut to ask
you if you would join me on a voyage; and when i found it empty i had
no idea where you could be. i am dreadfully sorry to hear about your
bad luck. ive come to see if there is anything i can do.

luke shook his head.

no, i dont imagine there is anything can be done. theyve caught me
at last. thats the end of it, i suppose.

he got up stiffly and started walking up and down the little room.

in a way im glad its over, said he. i never got any peace, always
thinking they were after meafraid to speak to anyone. they were bound
to get me in the endyes, im glad its over.

then the doctor talked to luke for more than half an hour, trying to
cheer him up; while i sat around wondering what i ought to say and
wishing i could do something.

at last the doctor said he wanted to see bob; and we knocked upon the
door and were let out by the policeman.

bob, said the doctor to the big bulldog in the passage, come out
with me into the porch. i want to ask you something.

how is he, doctor? asked bob as we walked down the corridor into the
court-house porch.

oh, lukes all right. very miserable of course, but hes all right.
now tell me, bob: you saw this business happen, didnt you? you were
there when the man was killed, eh?

i was, doctor, said bob, and i tell you

all right, the doctor interrupted, thats all i want to know for the
present. there isnt time to tell me more now. the trial is just going
to begin. there are the judge and the lawyers coming up the steps. now
listen, bob: i want you to stay with me when i go into the court-room.
and whatever i tell you to do, do it. do you understand? dont make
any scenes. dont bite anybody, no matter what they may say about
luke. just behave perfectly quietly and answer any question i may ask
youtruthfully. do you understand?

very well. but do you think you will be able to get him off, doctor?
asked bob. hes a good man, doctor. he really is. there never was a
better.

well see, well see, bob. its a new thing im going to try. im not
sure the judge will allow it. butwell, well see. its time to go
into the court-room now. dont forget what i told you. remember: for
heavens sake dont start biting any one or youll get us all put out
and spoil everything.




_the fifth chapter_

mendoza


inside the court-room everything was very solemn and wonderful. it was
a high, big room. raised above the floor, against the wall was the
judges desk; and here the judge was already sittingan old, handsome
man in a marvelous big wig of gray hair and a gown of black. below him
was another wide, long desk at which lawyers in white wigs sat. the
whole thing reminded me of a mixture between a church and a school.

those twelve men at the side, whispered the doctorthose in pews
like a choir, they are what is called the jury. it is they who decide
whether luke is guiltywhether he did it or not.

and look! i said, theres luke himself in a sort of pulpit-thing
with policemen each side of him. and theres another pulpit, the same
kind, the other side of the room, seeonly that ones empty.

that one is called the witness-box, said the doctor. now im going
down to speak to one of those men in white wigs; and i want you to wait
here and keep these two seats for us. bob will stay with you. keep an
eye on himbetter hold on to his collar. i shant be more than a minute
or so.

with that the doctor disappeared into the crowd which filled the main
part of the room.

then i saw the judge take up a funny little wooden hammer and knock on
his desk with it. this, it seemed, was to make people keep quiet, for
immediately every one stopped buzzing and talking and began to listen
very respectfully. then another man in a black gown stood up and began
reading from a paper in his hand.

he mumbled away exactly as though he were saying his prayers and didnt
want any one to understand what language they were in. but i managed to
catch a few words:

_bizbizbizbizbiz_otherwise known as luke the
hermit, of_bizbizbizbiz_for killing his partner
with_bizbizbiz_otherwise known as bluebeard bill on the night
of the_bizbizbiz_in the _bizbizbiz_of mexico. therefore her
majestys_bizbizbiz_

at this moment i felt some one take hold of my arm from the back, and
turning round i found the doctor had returned with one of the men in
white wigs.

stubbins, this is mr. percy jenkyns, said the doctor. he is lukes
lawyer. it is his business to get luke offif he can.

mr. jenkyns seemed to be an extremely young man with a round smooth
face like a boy. he shook hands with me and then immediately turned and
went on talking with the doctor.

oh, i think it is a perfectly precious idea, he was saying. of
_course_ the dog must be admitted as a witness; he was the only one
who saw the thing take place. im awfully glad you came. i wouldnt
have missed this for anything. my hat! wont it make the old court sit
up? theyre always frightfully dull, these assizes. but this will stir
things. a bulldog witness for the defense! i do hope there are plenty
of reporters presentyes, theres one making a sketch of the prisoner.
i shall become known after thisand wont conkey be pleased? my hat!

he put his hand over his mouth to smother a laugh and his eyes fairly
sparkled with mischief.

who is conkey? i asked the doctor.

sh! he is speaking of the judge up there, the honorable eustace
beauchamp conckley.

now, said mr. jenkyns, bringing out a note-book, tell me a little
more about yourself, doctor. you took your degree as doctor of medicine
at durham, i think you said. and the name of your last book was?

i could not hear any more for they talked in whispers; and i fell to
looking round the court again.

of course i could not understand everything that was going on, though
it was all very interesting. people kept getting up in the place the
doctor called the witness-box, and the lawyers at the long table asked
them questions about the night of the 29th. then the people would get
down again and somebody else would get up and be questioned.

one of the lawyers (who, the doctor told me afterwards, was called the
prosecutor) seemed to be doing his best to get the hermit into trouble
by asking questions which made it look as though he had always been a
very bad man. he was a nasty lawyer, this prosecutor, with a long nose.

most of the time i could hardly keep my eyes off poor luke, who sat
there between his two policemen, staring at the floor as though he
werent interested. the only time i saw him take any notice at all was
when a small dark man with wicked, little, watery eyes got up into the
witness-box. i heard bob snarl under my chair as this person came into
the court-room and lukes eyes just blazed with anger and contempt.

this man said his name was mendoza and that he was the one who had
guided the mexican police to the mine after bluebeard bill had been
killed. and at every word he said i could hear bob down below me
muttering between his teeth,

its a lie! its a lie! ill chew his face. its a lie!

and both the doctor and i had hard work keeping the dog under the seat.

then i noticed that our mr. jenkyns had disappeared from the doctors
side. but presently i saw him stand up at the long table to speak to
the judge.

your honor, said he, i wish to introduce a new witness for the
defense, doctor john dolittle, the naturalist. will you please step
into the witness-stand, doctor?

there was a buzz of excitement as the doctor made his way across the
crowded room; and i noticed the nasty lawyer with the long nose lean
down and whisper something to a friend, smiling in an ugly way which
made me want to pinch him.

then mr. jenkyns asked the doctor a whole lot of questions about
himself and made him answer in a loud voice so the whole court could
hear. he finished up by saying,

and you are prepared to swear, doctor dolittle, that you understand
the language of dogs and can make them understand you. is that so?

yes, said the doctor, that is so.

and what, might i ask, put in the judge in a very quiet, dignified
voice, has all this to do with the killing of ererbluebeard bill?

this, your honor, said mr. jenkyns, talking in a very grand manner as
though he were on a stage in a theatre: there is in this court-room
at the present moment a bulldog, who was the only living thing that
saw the man killed. with the courts permission i propose to put that
dog in the witness-stand and have him questioned before you by the
eminent scientist, doctor john dolittle.




_the sixth chapter_

the judges dog


at first there was a dead silence in the court. then everybody began
whispering or giggling at the same time, till the whole room sounded
like a great hive of bees. many people seemed to be shocked; most of
them were amused; and a few were angry.

presently up sprang the nasty lawyer with the long nose.

i protest, your honor, he cried, waving his arms wildly to the judge.
i object. the dignity of this court is in peril. i protest.

i am the one to take care of the dignity of this court, said the
judge.

then mr. jenkyns got up again. (if it hadnt been such a serious
matter, it was almost like a punch-and-judy show: somebody was always
popping down and somebody else popping up).

if there is any doubt on the score of our being able to do as we say,
your honor will have no objection, i trust, to the doctors giving the
court a demonstration of his powersof showing that he actually can
understand the speech of animals?

i thought i saw a twinkle of amusement come into the old judges eyes
as he sat considering a moment before he answered.

no, he said at last, i dont think so. then he turned to the doctor.

are you quite sure you can do this? he asked.

quite, your honor, said the doctorquite sure.

very well then, said the judge. if you can satisfy us that you
really are able to understand canine testimony, the dog shall be
admitted as a witness. i do not see, in that case, how i could object
to his being heard. but i warn you that if you are trying to make a
laughing-stock of this court it will go hard with you.

i protest, i protest! yelled the long-nosed prosecutor. this is a
scandal, an outrage to the bar!

sit down! said the judge in a very stern voice.

what animal does your honor wish me to talk with? asked the doctor.

i would like you to talk to my own dog, said the judge. he is
outside in the cloak-room. i will have him brought in; and then we
shall see what you can do.

then someone went out and fetched the judges dog, a lovely great
russian wolf-hound with slender legs and a shaggy coat. he was a proud
and beautiful creature.

now, doctor, said the judge, did you ever see this dog
before?remember you are in the witness-stand and under oath.

no, your honor, i never saw him before.

very well then, will you please ask him to tell you what i had for
supper last night? he was with me and watched me while i ate.

then the doctor and the dog started talking to one another in signs and
sounds; and they kept at it for quite a long time. and the doctor began
to giggle and get so interested that he seemed to forget all about the
court and the judge and everything else.

what a time he takes! i heard a fat woman in front of me whispering.
hes only pretending. of course he cant do it! who ever heard of
talking to a dog? he must think were children.

havent you finished yet? the judge asked the doctor. it shouldnt
take that long just to ask what i had for supper.

oh no, your honor, said the doctor. the dog told me that long ago.
but then he went on to tell me what you did after supper.

never mind that, said the judge. tell me what answer he gave you to
my question.

he says you had a mutton-chop, two baked potatoes, a pickled walnut
and a glass of ale.

the honorable eustace beauchamp conckley went white to the lips.

sounds like witchcraft, he muttered. i never dreamed

and after your supper, the doctor went on, he says you went to see a
prize-fight and then sat up playing cards for money till twelve oclock
and came home singing, we wont get

that will do, the judge interrupted, i am satisfied you can do as
you say. the prisoners dog shall be admitted as a witness.

i protest, i object! screamed the prosecutor. your honor, this is

sit down! roared the judge. i say the dog shall be heard. that ends
the matter. put the witness in the stand.

and then for the first time in the solemn history of england a dog was
put in the witness-stand of her majestys court of assizes. and it
was i, tommy stubbins (when the doctor made a sign to me across the
room) who proudly led bob up the aisle, through the astonished crowd,
past the frowning, spluttering, long-nosed prosecutor, and made him
comfortable on a high chair in the witness-box; from where the old
bulldog sat scowling down over the rail upon the amazed and gaping
jury.

[illustration: sat scowling down upon the amazed and gaping jury]




_the seventh chapter_

the end of the mystery


the trial went swiftly forward after that. mr. jenkyns told the doctor
to ask bob what he saw on the night of the 29th; and when bob had
told all he knew and the doctor had turned it into english for the
judge and the jury, this was what he had to say:

on the night of the 29th of november, 1824, i was with my master, luke
fitzjohn (otherwise known as luke the hermit) and his two partners,
manuel mendoza and william boggs (otherwise known as bluebeard bill)
on their gold-mine in mexico. for a long time these three men had been
hunting for gold; and they had dug a deep hole in the ground. on the
morning of the 29th gold was discovered, lots of it, at the bottom of
this hole. and all three, my master and his two partners, were very
happy about it because now they would be rich. but manuel mendoza asked
bluebeard bill to go for a walk with him. these two men i had always
suspected of being bad. so when i noticed that they left my master
behind, i followed them secretly to see what they were up to. and in a
deep cave in the mountains i heard them arrange together to kill luke
the hermit so that they should get all the gold and he have none.

at this point the judge asked, where is the witness mendoza?
constable, see that he does not leave the court.

but the wicked little man with the watery eyes had already sneaked out
when no one was looking and he was never seen in puddleby again.

then, bobs statement went on, i went to my master and tried very
hard to make him understand that his partners were dangerous men. but
it was no use. he did not understand dog language. so i did the next
best thing: i never let him out of my sight but stayed with him every
moment of the day and night.

now the hole that they had made was so deep that to get down and up
it you had to go in a big bucket tied on the end of a rope; and the
three men used to haul one another up and let one another down the mine
in this way. that was how the gold was brought up tooin the bucket.
well, about seven oclock in the evening my master was standing at the
top of the mine, hauling up bluebeard bill who was in the bucket. just
as he had got bill halfway up i saw mendoza come out of the hut where
we all lived. mendoza thought that bill was away buying groceries. but
he wasnt: he was in the bucket. and when mendoza saw luke hauling and
straining on the rope he thought he was pulling up a bucketful of
gold. so he drew a pistol from his pocket and came sneaking up behind
luke to shoot him.

i barked and barked to warn my master of the danger he was in; but he
was so busy hauling up bill (who was a heavy fat man) that he took no
notice of me. i saw that if i didnt do something quick he would surely
be shot. so i did a thing ive never done before: suddenly and savagely
i bit my master in the leg from behind. luke was so hurt and startled
that he did just what i wanted him to do: he let go the rope with both
hands at once and turned round. and then, _crash!_ down went bill in
his bucket to the bottom of the mine and he was killed.

while my master was busy scolding me mendoza put his pistol in his
pocket, came up with a smile on his face and looked down the mine.

why, good gracious! said he to luke, youve killed bluebeard bill.
i must go and tell the policehoping, you see, to get the whole mine
to himself when luke should be put in prison. then he jumped on his
horse and galloped away.

and soon my master grew afraid; for he saw that if mendoza only told
enough lies to the police, it _would_ look as though he had killed bill
on purpose. so while mendoza was gone he and i stole away together
secretly and came to england. here he shaved off his beard and became a
hermit. and ever since, for fifteen years, weve remained in hiding.
this is all i have to say. and i swear it is the truth, every word.

when the doctor finished reading bobs long speech the excitement among
the twelve men of the jury was positively terrific. one, a very old
man with white hair, began to weep in a loud voice at the thought of
poor luke hiding on the fen for fifteen years for something he couldnt
help. and all the others set to whispering and nodding their heads to
one another.

in the middle of all this up got that horrible prosecutor again, waving
his arms more wildly than ever.

your honor, he cried, i must object to this evidence as biased.
of course the dog would not tell the truth against his own master. i
object. i protest.

very well, said the judge, you are at liberty to cross-examine. it
is your duty as prosecutor to prove his evidence untrue. there is the
dog: question him, if you do not believe what he says.

i thought the long-nosed lawyer would have a fit. he looked first at
the dog, then at the doctor, then at the judge, then back at the dog
scowling from the witness-box. he opened his mouth to say something;
but no words came. he waved his arms some more. his face got redder
and redder. at last, clutching his forehead, he sank weakly into his
seat and had to be helped out of the court-room by two friends. as he
was half carried through the door he was still feebly murmuring, i
protesti objecti protest!




_the eighth chapter_

three cheers


next the judge made a very long speech to the jury; and when it was
over all the twelve jurymen got up and went out into the next room. and
at that point the doctor came back, leading bob, to the seat beside me.

what have the jurymen gone out for? i asked.

they always do that at the end of a trialto make up their minds
whether the prisoner did it or not.

couldnt you and bob go in with them and help them make up their minds
the right way? i asked.

no, thats not allowed. they have to talk it over in secret. sometimes
it takesmy gracious, look, theyre coming back already! they didnt
spend long over it.

everybody kept quite still while the twelve men came tramping back
into their places in the pews. then one of them, the leadera little
manstood up and turned to the judge. every one was holding his breath,
especially the doctor and myself, to see what he was going to say. you
could have heard a pin drop while the whole court-room, the whole of
puddleby in fact, waited with craning necks and straining ears to hear
the weighty words.

your honor, said the little man, the jury returns a verdict of _not
guilty_.

whats that mean? i asked, turning to the doctor.

but i found doctor john dolittle, the famous naturalist, standing on
top of a chair, dancing about on one leg like a schoolboy.

it means hes free! he cried, luke is free!

then hell be able to come on the voyage with us, wont he?

but i could not hear his answer; for the whole court-room seemed to
be jumping up on chairs like the doctor. the crowd had suddenly gone
crazy. all the people were laughing and calling and waving to luke to
show him how glad they were that he was free. the noise was deafening.

then it stopped. all was quiet again; and the people stood up
respectfully while the judge left the court. for the trial of luke the
hermit, that famous trial which to this day they are still talking of
in puddleby, was over.

in the hush while the judge was leaving, a sudden shriek rang out, and
there, in the doorway stood a woman, her arms out-stretched to the
hermit.

luke! she cried, ive found you at last!

its his wife, the fat woman in front of me whispered. she aint
seen im in fifteen years, poor dear! what a lovely re-union. im glad
i came. i wouldnt have missed this for anything!

as soon as the judge had gone the noise broke out again; and now the
folks gathered round luke and his wife and shook them by the hand and
congratulated them and laughed over them and cried over them.

come along, stubbins, said the doctor, taking me by the arm, lets
get out of this while we can.

but arent you going to speak to luke? i saidto ask him if hell
come on the voyage?

it wouldnt be a bit of use, said the doctor. his wifes come for
him. no man stands any chance of going on a voyage when his wife hasnt
seen him in fifteen years. come along. lets get home to tea. we didnt
have any lunch, remember. and weve earned something to eat. well have
one of those mixed meals, lunch and tea combinedwith watercress and
ham. nice change. come along.

just as we were going to step out at a side door i heard the crowd
shouting,

the doctor! the doctor! wheres the doctor? the hermit would have
hanged if it hadnt been for the doctor. speech! speech!the doctor!

and a man came running up to us and said,

the people are calling for you, sir.

im very sorry, said the doctor, but im in a hurry.

the crowd wont be denied, sir, said the man. they want you to make
a speech in the market-place.

beg them to excuse me, said the doctorwith my compliments. i have
an appointment at my housea very important one which i may not break.
tell luke to make a speech. come along, stubbins, this way.

oh lord! he muttered as we got out into the open air and found
another crowd waiting for him at the side door. lets go up that
alleywayto the left. quick!run!

we took to our heels, darted through a couple of side streets and just
managed to get away from the crowd.

it was not till we had gained the oxenthorpe road that we dared to
slow down to a walk and take our breath. and even when we reached the
doctors gate and turned to look backwards towards the town, the faint
murmur of many voices still reached us on the evening wind.

theyre still clamoring for you, i said. listen!

the murmur suddenly swelled up into a low distant roar; and although it
was a mile and half away you could distinctly hear the words,

three cheers for luke the hermit: hooray!three cheers for his dog:
hooray!three cheers for his wife: hooray!three cheers for the doctor:
hooray! hooray! hoo-r-a-y!




_the ninth chapter_

the purple bird-of-paradise


polynesia was waiting for us in the front porch. she looked full of
some important news.

doctor, said she, the purple bird-of-paradise has arrived!

at last! said the doctor. i had begun to fear some accident had
befallen her. and how is miranda?

from the excited way in which the doctor fumbled his key into the lock
i guessed that we were not going to get our tea right away, even now.

oh, she seemed all right when she arrived, said polynesiatired from
her long journey of course but otherwise all right. but what _do_ you
think? that mischief-making sparrow, cheapside, insulted her as soon
as she came into the garden. when i arrived on the scene she was in
tears and was all for turning round and going straight back to brazil
to-night. i had the hardest work persuading her to wait till you came.
shes in the study. i shut cheapside in one of your book-cases and told
him id tell you exactly what had happened the moment you got home.

the doctor frowned, then walked silently and quickly to the study.

here we found the candles lit; for the daylight was nearly gone.
dab-dab was standing on the floor mounting guard over one of the
glass-fronted book-cases in which cheapside had been imprisoned. the
noisy little sparrow was still fluttering angrily behind the glass when
we came in.

in the centre of the big table, perched on the ink-stand, stood the
most beautiful bird i have ever seen. she had a deep violet-colored
breast, scarlet wings and a long, long sweeping tail of gold. she was
unimaginably beautiful but looked dreadfully tired. already she had her
head under her wing; and she swayed gently from side to side on top of
the ink-stand like a bird that has flown long and far.

sh! said dab-dab. miranda is asleep. ive got this little imp
cheapside in here. listen, doctor: for heavens sake send that sparrow
away before he does any more mischief. hes nothing but a vulgar little
nuisance. weve had a perfectly awful time trying to get miranda to
stay. shall i serve your tea in here, or will you come into the kitchen
when youre ready?

well come into the kitchen, dab-dab, said the doctor. let cheapside
out before you go, please.

dab-dab opened the bookcase-door and cheapside strutted out trying hard
not to look guilty.

cheapside, said the doctor sternly, what did you say to miranda when
she arrived?

i didnt say nothing, doc, straight i didnt. that is, nothing much. i
was picking up crumbs off the gravel path when she comes swanking into
the garden, turning up her nose in all directions, as though she owned
the earthjust because shes got a lot of colored plumage. a london
sparrows as good as her any day. i dont hold by these gawdy bedizened
foreigners nohow. why dont they stay in their own country?

but what did you say to her that got her so offended?

all i said was, you dont belong in an english garden; you ought to
be in a milliners window. thats all.

you ought to be ashamed of yourself, cheapside. dont you realize that
this bird has come thousands of miles to see meonly to be insulted by
your impertinent tongue as soon as she reaches my garden? what do you
mean by it?if she had gone away again before i got back to-night i
would never have forgiven youleave the room.

sheepishly, but still trying to look as though he didnt care,
cheapside hopped out into the passage and dab-dab closed the door.

the doctor went up to the beautiful bird on the ink-stand and gently
stroked its back. instantly its head popped out from under its wing.




_the tenth chapter_

long arrow, the son of golden arrow


well, miranda, said the doctor. im terribly sorry this has
happened. but you mustnt mind cheapside; he doesnt know any better.
hes a city bird; and all his life he has had to squabble for a living.
you must make allowances. he doesnt know any better.

miranda stretched her gorgeous wings wearily. now that i saw her awake
and moving i noticed what a superior, well-bred manner she had. there
were tears in her eyes and her beak was trembling.

i wouldnt have minded so much, she said in a high silvery voice,
if i hadnt been so dreadfully worn outthat and something else, she
added beneath her breath.

did you have a hard time getting here? asked the doctor.

the worst passage i ever made, said miranda. the weatherwell there.
whats the use? im here anyway.

tell me, said the doctor as though he had been impatiently waiting to
say something for a long time: what did long arrow say when you gave
him my message?

the purple bird-of-paradise hung her head.

thats the worst part of it, she said. i might almost as well have
not come at all. i wasnt able to deliver your message. i couldnt find
him. _long arrow, the son of golden arrow, has disappeared!_

disappeared! cried the doctor. why, whats become of him?

nobody knows, miranda answered. he had often disappeared before, as
i have told youso that the indians didnt know where he was. but its
a mighty hard thing to hide away from the birds. i had always been able
to find some owl or martin who could tell me where he wasif i wanted
to know. but not this time. thats why im nearly a fortnight late in
coming to you: i kept hunting and hunting, asking everywhere. i went
over the whole length and breadth of south america. but there wasnt a
living thing could tell me where he was.

there was a sad silence in the room after she had finished; the doctor
was frowning in a peculiar sort of way and polynesia scratched her head.

did you ask the black parrots? asked polynesia. they usually know
everything.

certainly i did, said miranda. and i was so upset at not being
able to find out anything, that i forgot all about observing the
weather-signs before i started my flight here. i didnt even bother to
break my journey at the azores, but cut right across, making for the
straits of gibraltaras though it were june or july. and of course i
ran into a perfectly frightful storm in mid-atlantic. i really thought
id never come through it. luckily i found a piece of a wrecked vessel
floating in the sea after the storm had partly died down; and i roosted
on it and took some sleep. if i hadnt been able to take that rest i
wouldnt be here to tell the tale.

poor miranda! what a time you must have had! said the doctor. but
tell me, were you able to find out whereabouts long arrow was last
seen?

yes. a young albatross told me he had seen him on spidermonkey island?

spidermonkey island? thats somewhere off the coast of brazil, isnt
it?

yes, thats it. of course i flew there right away and asked every bird
on the islandand it is a big island, a hundred miles long. it seems
that long arrow was visiting some peculiar indians that live there;
and that when last seen he was going up into the mountains looking for
rare medicine-plants. i got that from a tame hawk, a pet, which the
chief of the indians keeps for hunting partridges with. i nearly got
caught and put in a cage for my pains too. thats the worst of having
beautiful feathers: its as much as your life is worth to go near most
humansthey say, oh how pretty! and shoot an arrow or a bullet into
you. you and long arrow were the only two men that i would ever trust
myself nearout of all the people in the world.

but was he never known to have returned from the mountains?

no. that was the last that was seen or heard of him. i questioned the
sea-birds around the shores to find out if he had left the island in a
canoe. but they could tell me nothing.

do you think that some accident has happened to him? asked the doctor
in a fearful voice.

im afraid it must have, said miranda shaking her head.

well, said john dolittle slowly, if i could never meet long arrow
face to face it would be the greatest disappointment in my whole
life. not only that, but it would be a great loss to the knowledge of
the human race. for, from what you have told me of him, he knew more
natural science than all the rest of us put together; and if he has
gone without any one to write it down for him, so the world may be the
better for it, it would be a terrible thing. but you dont really
think that he is dead, do you?

[illustration: what else can i think?]

what else can i think? asked miranda, bursting into tears, when for
six whole months he has not been seen by flesh, fish or fowl.




_the eleventh chapter_

blind travel


this news about long arrow made us all very sad. and i could see from
the silent dreamy way the doctor took his tea that he was dreadfully
upset. every once in a while he would stop eating altogether and sit
staring at the spots on the kitchen table-cloth as though his thoughts
were far away; till dab-dab, who was watching to see that he got a good
meal, would cough or rattle the pots in the sink.

i did my best to cheer him up by reminding him of all he had done for
luke and his wife that afternoon. and when that didnt seem to work, i
went on talking about our preparations for the voyage.

but you see, stubbins, said he as we rose from the table and dab-dab
and chee-chee began to clear away, i dont know where to go now. i
feel sort of lost since miranda brought me this news. on this voyage i
had planned going to see long arrow. i had been looking forward to it
for a whole year. i felt he might help me in learning the language of
the shellfishand perhaps in finding some way of getting to the bottom
of the sea. but now?hes gone! and all his great knowledge has gone
with him.

then he seemed to fall a-dreaming again.

just to think of it! he murmured. long arrow and i, two
studentsalthough id never met him, i felt as though i knew him quite
well. for, in his waywithout any schoolinghe has, all his life, been
trying to do the very things which i have tried to do in mineand now
hes gone!a whole world lay between usand only a bird knew us both!

we went back into the study, where jip brought the doctor his slippers
and his pipe. and after the pipe was lit and the smoke began to fill
the room the old man seemed to cheer up a little.

but you will go on some voyage, doctor, wont you? i askedeven if
you cant go to find long arrow.

he looked up sharply into my face; and i suppose he saw how anxious i
was. because he suddenly smiled his old, boyish smile and said,

yes, stubbins. dont worry. well go. we mustnt stop working and
learning, even if poor long arrow has disappearedbut where to go:
thats the question. where shall we go?

there were so many places that i wanted to go that i couldnt make up
my mind right away. and while i was still thinking, the doctor sat up
in his chair and said,

i tell you what well do, stubbins: its a game i used to play when i
was youngbefore sarah came to live with me. i used to call it blind
travel. whenever i wanted to go on a voyage, and i couldnt make up my
mind where to go, i would take the atlas and open it with my eyes shut.
next, id wave a pencil, still without looking, and stick it down on
whatever page had fallen open. then id open my eyes and look. its a
very exciting game, is blind travel. because you have to swear, before
you begin, that you will go to the place the pencil touches, come what
may. shall we play it?

oh, lets! i almost yelled. how thrilling! i hope its chinaor
borneoor bagdad.

and in a moment i had scrambled up the bookcase, dragged the big atlas
from the top shelf and laid it on the table before the doctor.

i knew every page in that atlas by heart. how many days and nights i
had lingered over its old faded maps, following the blue rivers from
the mountains to the sea; wondering what the little towns really looked
like, and how wide were the sprawling lakes! i had had a lot of fun
with that atlas, traveling, in my mind, all over the world. i can see
it now: the first page had no map; it just told you that it was printed
in edinburgh in 1808, and a whole lot more about the book. the next
page was the solar system, showing the sun and planets, the stars and
the moon. the third page was the chart of the north and south poles.
then came the hemispheres, the oceans, the continents and the countries.

as the doctor began sharpening his pencil a thought came to me.

what if the pencil falls upon the north pole, i asked, will we have
to go there?

no. the rules of the game say you dont have to go any place youve
been to before. you are allowed another try. ive been to the north
pole, he ended quietly, so we shant have to go there.

i could hardly speak with astonishment.

_youve been to the north pole!_ i managed to gasp out at last. but
i thought it was still undiscovered. the map shows all the places
explorers have reached to, _trying_ to get there. why isnt your name
down if you discovered it?

i promised to keep it a secret. and you must promise me never to
tell any one. yes, i discovered the north pole in april, 1809. but
shortly after i got there the polar bears came to me in a body and
told me there was a great deal of coal there, buried beneath the snow.
they knew, they said, that human beings would do anything, and go
anywhere, to get coal. so would i please keep it a secret. because
once people began coming up there to start coal-mines, their beautiful
white country would be spoiledand there was nowhere else in the world
cold enough for polar bears to be comfortable. so of course i had to
promise them i would. ah, well, it will be discovered again some day,
by somebody else. but i want the polar bears to have their play-ground
to themselves as long as possible. and i daresay it will be a good
while yetfor it certainly is a fiendish place to get towell now, are
we ready?good! take the pencil and stand here close to the table. when
the book falls open, wave the pencil round three times and jab it down.
ready?all right. shut your eyes.

it was a tense and fearful momentbut very thrilling. we both had our
eyes shut tight. i heard the atlas fall open with a bang. i wondered
what page it was: england or asia. if it should be the map of asia, so
much would depend on where that pencil would land. i waved three times
in a circle. i began to lower my hand. the pencil-point touched the
page.

all right, i called out, its done.




_the twelfth chapter_

destiny and destination


we both opened our eyes; then bumped our heads together with a crack in
our eagerness to lean over and see where we were to go.

the atlas lay open at a map called, _chart of the south atlantic
ocean_. my pencil-point was resting right in the center of a tiny
island. the name of it was printed so small that the doctor had to get
out his strong spectacles to read it. i was trembling with excitement.

_spidermonkey island_, he read out slowly. then he whistled softly
beneath his breath. of all the extraordinary things! youve hit upon
the very island where long arrow was last seen on earthi wonderwell,
well! how very singular!

well go there, doctor, wont we? i asked.

of course we will. the rules of the game say weve got to.

im so glad it wasnt oxenthorpe or bristol, i said. itll be a
grand voyage, this. look at all the sea weve got to cross. will it
take us long?

oh, no, said the doctornot very. with a good boat and a good wind
we should make it easily in four weeks. but isnt it extraordinary?
of all the places in the world you picked out that one with your eyes
shut. spidermonkey island after all!well, theres one good thing about
it: i shall be able to get some jabizri beetles.

what are jabizri beetles?

they are a very rare kind of beetles with peculiar habits. i want to
study them. there are only three countries in the world where they are
to be found. spidermonkey island is one of them. but even there they
are very scarce.

what is this little question-mark after the name of the island for? i
asked, pointing to the map.

that means that the islands position in the ocean is not known very
exactlythat it is somewhere _about_ there. ships have probably seen it
in that neighborhood, that is all, most likely. it is quite possible we
shall be the first white men to land there. but i daresay we shall have
some difficulty in finding it first.

how like a dream it all sounded! the two of us sitting there at the big
study-table; the candles lit; the smoke curling towards the dim ceiling
from the doctors pipethe two of us sitting there, talking about
finding an island in the ocean and being the first white men to land
upon it!

ill bet it will be a great voyage, i said. it looks a lovely
island on the map. will there be black men there?

no. a peculiar tribe of red indians lives on it, miranda tells me.

at this point the poor bird-of-paradise stirred and woke up. in our
excitement we had forgotten to speak low.

we are going to spidermonkey island, miranda, said the doctor. you
know where it is, do you not?

i know where it was the last time i saw it, said the bird. but
whether it will be there still, i cant say.

what do you mean? asked the doctor. it is always in the same place
surely?

not by any means, said miranda. why, didnt you know?spidermonkey
island is a _floating_ island. it moves around all over the
placeusually somewhere near southern south america. but of course i
could surely find it for you if you want to go there.

at this fresh piece of news i could contain myself no longer. i was
bursting to tell some one. i ran dancing and singing from the room to
find chee-chee.

at the door i tripped over dab-dab, who was just coming in with her
wings full of plates, and fell headlong on my nose.

has the boy gone crazy? cried the duck. where do you think youre
going, ninny?

to spidermonkey island! i shouted, picking myself up and doing
cart-wheels down the hallspidermonkey island! hooray!and its a
_floating_ island!

youre going to bedlam, i should say, snorted the housekeeper. look
what youve done to my best china!

but i was far too happy to listen to her scolding; and i ran on,
singing, into the kitchen to find chee-chee.

[illustration]




part three




_the first chapter_

the third man


that same week we began our preparations for the voyage.

joe, the mussel-man, had the _curlew_ moved down the river and tied it
up along the river-wall, so it would be more handy for loading. and for
three whole days we carried provisions down to our beautiful new boat
and stowed them away.

i was surprised to find how roomy and big she was inside. there were
three little cabins, a saloon (or dining-room) and underneath all this,
a big place called the hold where the food and extra sails and other
things were kept.

i think joe must have told everybody in the town about our coming
voyage, because there was always a regular crowd watching us when we
brought the things down to put aboard. and of course sooner or later
old matthew mugg was bound to turn up.

my goodness, tommy, said he, as he watched me carrying on some sacks
of flour, but thats a pretty boat! where might the doctor be going
to this voyage?

were going to spidermonkey island, i said proudly.

and be you the only one the doctors taking along?

well, he has spoken of wanting to take another man, i said; but so
far he hasnt made up his mind.

matthew grunted; then squinted up at the graceful masts of the _curlew_.

you know, tommy, said he, if it wasnt for my rheumatism ive half
a mind to come with the doctor myself. theres something about a boat
standing ready to sail that always did make me feel venturesome and
travelish-like. whats that stuff in the cans youre taking on?

this is treacle, i saidtwenty pounds of treacle.

my goodness, he sighed, turning away sadly. that makes me feel more
like going with you than everbut my rheumatism is that bad i cant
hardly

i didnt hear any more for matthew had moved off, still mumbling, into
the crowd that stood about the wharf. the clock in puddleby church
struck noon and i turned back, feeling very busy and important, to the
task of loading.

but it wasnt very long before some one else came along and
interrupted my work. this was a huge, big, burly man with a red beard
and tattoo-marks all over his arms. he wiped his mouth with the back of
his hand, spat twice on to the river-wall and said,

boy, wheres the skipper?

the _skipper_!who do you mean? i asked.

the captainwheres the captain of this craft? he said, pointing to
the _curlew_.

oh, you mean the doctor, said i. well, he isnt here at present.

at that moment the doctor arrived with his arms full of note-books and
butterfly-nets and glass cases and other natural history things. the
big man went up to him, respectfully touching his cap.

good morning, captain, said he. i heard you was in need of hands for
a voyage. my names ben butcher, able seaman.

i am very glad to know you, said the doctor. but im afraid i shant
be able to take on any more crew.

why, but captain, said the able seaman, you surely aint going to
face deep-sea weather with nothing more than this bit of a lad to help
youand with a cutter that big!

the doctor assured him that he was; but the man didnt go away. he hung
around and argued. he told us he had known of many ships being sunk
through undermanning. he got out what he called his _stiffikit_a
paper which said what a good sailor he wasand implored us, if we
valued our lives, to take him.

[illustration: boy, wheres the skipper?]

but the doctor was quite firmpolite but determinedand finally the man
walked sorrowfully away, telling us he never expected to see us alive
again.

callers of one sort and another kept us quite busy that morning.
the doctor had no sooner gone below to stow away his note-books
than another visitor appeared upon the gang-plank. this was a most
extraordinary-looking black man. the only other negroes i had seen
had been in circuses, where they wore feathers and bone necklaces and
things like that. but this one was dressed in a fashionable frock coat
with an enormous bright red cravat. on his head was a straw hat with
a gay band; and over this he held a large green umbrella. he was very
smart in every respect except his feet. he wore no shoes or socks.

pardon me, said he, bowing elegantly, but is this the ship of the
physician dolittle?

yes, i said, did you wish to see him?

i didif it will not be discommodious, he answered.

who shall i say it is?

i am bumpo kahbooboo, crown prince of jolliginki.

i ran downstairs at once and told the doctor.

how fortunate! cried john dolittle. my old friend bumpo! well,
well!hes studying at oxford, you know. how good of him to come all
this way to call on me! and he tumbled up the ladder to greet his
visitor.

the strange black man seemed to be overcome with joy when the doctor
appeared and shook him warmly by the hand.

news reached me, he said, that you were about to sail upon a voyage.
i hastened to see you before your departure. i am sublimely ecstasied
that i did not miss you.

you very nearly did miss us, said the doctor. as it happened, we
were delayed somewhat in getting the necessary number of men to sail
our boat. if it hadnt been for that, we would have been gone three
days ago.

how many men does your ships company yet require? asked bumpo.

only one, said the doctorbut it is so hard to find the right one.

methinks i detect something of the finger of destination in this,
said bumpo. how would i do?

splendidly, said the doctor. but what about your studies? you cant
very well just go off and leave your university career to take care of
itself, you know.

i need a holiday, said bumpo. even had i not gone with you, i
intended at the end of this term to take a three-months absconsionbut
besides, i shall not be neglecting my edification if i accompany you.
before i left jolliginki my august father, the king, told me to be
sure and travel plenty. you are a man of great studiosity. to see the
world in your company is an opportunity not to be sneezed upon. no, no,
indeed.

how did you like the life at oxford? asked the doctor.

oh, passably, passably, said bumpo. i liked it all except the
algebra and the shoes. the algebra hurt my head and the shoes hurt my
feet. i threw the shoes over a wall as soon as i got out of the college
quadrilateral this morning; and the algebra i am happily forgetting
very fasti liked ciceroyes, i think ciceros fineso simultaneous.
by the way, they tell me his son is rowing for our college next
yearcharming fellow.

the doctor looked down at the black mans huge bare feet thoughtfully a
moment.

well, he said slowly, there is something in what you say, bumpo,
about getting education from the world as well as from the college. and
if you are really sure that you want to come, we shall be delighted to
have you. because, to tell you the truth, i think you are exactly the
man we need.




_the second chapter_

good-bye!


two days after that we had all in readiness for our departure.

on this voyage jip begged so hard to be taken that the doctor finally
gave in and said he could come. polynesia and chee-chee were the only
other animals to go with us. dab-dab was left in charge of the house
and the animal family we were to leave behind.

of course, as is always the way, at the last moment we kept remembering
things we had forgotten; and when we finally closed the house up and
went down the steps to the road, we were all burdened with armfuls of
odd packages.

halfway to the river, the doctor suddenly remembered that he had left
the stock-pot boiling on the kitchen-fire. however, we saw a blackbird
flying by who nested in our garden, and the doctor asked her to go back
for us and tell dab-dab about it.

down at the river-wall we found a great crowd waiting to see us off.

standing right near the gang-plank were my mother and father. i hoped
that they would not make a scene, or burst into tears or anything like
that. but as a matter of fact they behaved quite wellfor parents. my
mother said something about being sure not to get my feet wet; and my
father just smiled a crooked sort of smile, patted me on the back and
wished me luck. good-byes are awfully uncomfortable things and i was
glad when it was over and we passed on to the ship.

we were a little surprised not to see matthew mugg among the crowd. we
had felt sure that he would be there; and the doctor had intended to
give him some extra instructions about the food for the animals we had
left at the house.

at last, after much pulling and tugging, we got the anchor up and undid
a lot of mooring-ropes. then the _curlew_ began to move gently down the
river with the out-running tide, while the people on the wall cheered
and waved their handkerchiefs.

we bumped into one or two other boats getting out into the stream; and
at one sharp bend in the river we got stuck on a mud bank for a few
minutes. but though the people on the shore seemed to get very excited
at these things, the doctor did not appear to be disturbed by them in
the least.

these little accidents will happen in the most carefully regulated
voyages, he said as he leaned over the side and fished for his boots
which had got stuck in the mud while we were pushing off. sailing is
much easier when you get out into the open sea. there arent so many
silly things to bump into.

for me indeed it was a great and wonderful feeling, that getting out
into the open sea, when at length we passed the little lighthouse at
the mouth of the river and found ourselves free of the land. it was all
so new and different: just the sky above you and sea below. this ship,
which was to be our house and our street, our home and our garden, for
so many days to come, seemed so tiny in all this wide waterso tiny and
yet so snug, sufficient, safe.

i looked around me and took in a deep breath. the doctor was at the
wheel steering the boat which was now leaping and plunging gently
through the waves. (i had expected to feel seasick at first but was
delighted to find that i didnt.) bumpo had been told off to go
downstairs and prepare dinner for us. chee-chee was coiling up ropes
in the stern and laying them in neat piles. my work was fastening down
the things on the deck so that nothing could roll about if the weather
should grow rough when we got further from the land. jip was up in the
peak of the boat with ears cocked and nose stuck outlike a statue, so
stillhis keen old eyes keeping a sharp look-out for floating wrecks,
sand-bars, and other dangers. each one of us had some special job to
do, part of the proper running of a ship. even old polynesia was taking
the seas temperature with the doctors bath-thermometer tied on the
end of a string, to make sure there were no icebergs near us. as i
listened to her swearing softly to herself because she couldnt read
the pesky figures in the fading light, i realized that the voyage had
begun in earnest and that very soon it would be nightmy first night at
sea!




_the third chapter_

our troubles begin


just before supper-time bumpo appeared from downstairs and went to the
doctor at the wheel.

a stowaway in the hold, sir, said he in a very business-like
seafaring voice. i just discovered him, behind the flour-bags.

dear me! said the doctor. what a nuisance! stubbins, go down with
bumpo and bring the man up. i cant leave the wheel just now.

so bumpo and i went down into the hold; and there, behind the
flour-bags, plastered in flour from head to foot, we found a man. after
we had swept most of the flour off him with a broom, we discovered
that it was matthew mugg. we hauled him upstairs sneezing and took him
before the doctor.

why matthew! said john dolittle. what on earth are you doing here?

the temptation was too much for me, doctor, said the cats-meat-man.
you know ive often asked you to take me on voyages with you and you
never would. well, this time, knowing that you needed an extra man, i
thought if i stayed hid till the ship was well at sea you would find i
came in handy like and keep me. but i had to lie so doubled up, for
hours, behind them flour-bags, that my rheumatism came on something
awful. i just had to change my position; and of course just as i
stretched out my legs along comes this here african cook of yours and
sees my feet sticking outdont this ship roll something awful! how
long has this storm been going on? i reckon this damp sea air wouldnt
be very good for my rheumatics.

no, matthew it really isnt. you ought not to have come. you are not
in any way suited to this kind of a life. im sure you wouldnt enjoy
a long voyage a bit. well stop in at penzance and put you ashore.
bumpo, please go downstairs to my bunk; and listen: in the pocket of
my dressing-gown youll find some maps. bring me the small onewith
blue pencil-marks at the top. i know penzance is over here on our left
somewhere. but i must find out what light-houses there are before i
change the ships course and sail inshore.

very good, sir, said bumpo, turning round smartly and making for the
stairway.

now matthew, said the doctor, you can take the coach from penzance
to bristol. and from there it is not very far to puddleby, as you know.
dont forget to take the usual provisions to the house every thursday,
and be particularly careful to remember the extra supply of herrings
for the baby minks.

while we were waiting for the maps chee-chee and i set about lighting
the lamps: a green one on the right side of the ship, a red one on the
left and a white one on the mast.

at last we heard some one trundling on the stairs again and the doctor
said,

ah, heres bumpo with the maps at last!

but to our great astonishment it was not bumpo alone that appeared but
_three_ people.

good lord deliver us! who are these? cried john dolittle.

two more stowaways, sir, said bumpo stepping forward briskly. i
found them in your cabin hiding under the bunk. one woman and one man,
sir. here are the maps.

this is too much, said the doctor feebly. who are they? i cant see
their faces in this dim light. strike a match, bumpo.

you could never guess who it was. it was luke and his wife. mrs. luke
appeared to be very miserable and seasick.

they explained to the doctor that after they had settled down to live
together in the little shack out on the fens, so many people came
to visit them (having heard about the great trial) that life became
impossible; and they had decided to escape from puddleby in this
mannerfor they had no money to leave any other wayand try to find
some new place to live where they and their story wouldnt be so well
known. but as soon as the ship had begun to roll mrs. luke had got most
dreadfully unwell.

poor luke apologized many times for being such a nuisance and said that
the whole thing had been his wifes idea.

the doctor, after he had sent below for his medicine-bag and had given
mrs. luke some _sal volatile_ and smelling-salts, said he thought the
best thing to do would be for him to lend them some money and put them
ashore at penzance with matthew. he also wrote a letter for luke to
take with him to a friend the doctor had in the town of penzance who,
it was hoped, would be able to find luke work to do there.

as the doctor opened his purse and took out some gold coins i heard
polynesia, who was sitting on my shoulder watching the whole affair,
mutter beneath her breath,

there he goeslending his last blessed pennythree pounds tenall
the money we had for the whole trip! now we havent the price of a
postage-stamp aboard if we should lose an anchor or have to buy a pint
of tarwell, lets pray we dont run out of foodwhy doesnt he give
them the ship and walk home?

presently with the help of the map the course of the boat was changed
and, to mrs. lukes great relief, we made for penzance and dry land.

i was tremendously interested to see how a ship could be steered into a
port at night with nothing but light-houses and a compass to guide you.
it seemed to me that the doctor missed all the rocks and sand-bars very
cleverly.

we got into that funny little cornish harbor about eleven oclock that
night. the doctor took his stowaways on shore in our small row-boat
which we kept on the deck of the _curlew_ and found them rooms at
the hotel there. when he got back he told us that mrs. luke had gone
straight to bed and was feeling much better.

it was now after midnight; so we decided to stay in the harbor and wait
till morning before setting out again.

i was glad to get to bed, although i felt that staying up so
tremendously late was great fun. as i climbed into the bunk over the
doctors and pulled the blankets snugly round me, i found i could look
out of the port-hole at my elbow, and, without raising my head from
the pillow, could see the lights of penzance swinging gently up and
down with the motion of the ship at anchor. it was like being rocked
to sleep with a little show going on to amuse you. i was just deciding
that i liked the life of the sea very much when i fell fast asleep.




_the fourth chapter_

our troubles continue


the next morning when we were eating a very excellent breakfast of
kidneys and bacon, prepared by our good cook bumpo, the doctor said to
me,

i was just wondering, stubbins, whether i should stop at the capa
blanca islands or run right across for the coast of brazil. miranda
said we could expect a spell of excellent weather nowfor four and a
half weeks at least.

well, i said, spooning out the sugar at the bottom of my cocoa-cup,
i should think it would be best to make straight across while we
are sure of good weather. and besides the purple bird-of-paradise is
going to keep a lookout for us, isnt she? shell be wondering whats
happened to us if we dont get there in about a month.

true, quite true, stubbins. on the other hand, the capa blancas make
a very convenient stopping place on our way across. if we should need
supplies or repairs it would be very handy to put in there.

how long will it take us from here to the capa blancas? i asked.

about six days, said the doctorwell, we can decide later. for the
next two days at any rate our direction would be the same practically
in either case. if you have finished breakfast lets go and get under
way.

upstairs i found our vessel surrounded by white and gray seagulls
who flashed and circled about in the sunny morning air, looking for
food-scraps thrown out by the ships into the harbor.

by about half past seven we had the anchor up and the sails set to a
nice steady breeze; and this time we got out into the open sea without
bumping into a single thing. we met the penzance fishing fleet coming
in from the nights fishing, and very trim and neat they looked, in a
line like soldiers, with their red-brown sails all leaning over the
same way and the white water dancing before their bows.

for the next three or four days everything went smoothly and nothing
unusual happened. during this time we all got settled down into our
regular jobs; and in spare moments the doctor showed each of us how to
take our turns at the wheel, the proper manner of keeping a ship on her
right course, and what to do if the wind changed suddenly. we divided
the twenty-four hours of the day into three spells; and we took it in
turns to sleep our eight hours and be awake sixteen. so the ship was
well looked after, with two of us always on duty.

besides that, polynesia, who was an older sailor than any of us, and
really knew a lot about running ships, seemed to be always awakeexcept
when she took her couple of winks in the sun, standing on one leg
beside the wheel. you may be sure that no one ever got a chance to stay
abed more than his eight hours while polynesia was around. she used to
watch the ships clock; and if you overslept a half-minute, she would
come down to the cabin and peck you gently on the nose till you got up.

i very soon grew to be quite fond of our funny black friend bumpo,
with his grand way of speaking and his enormous feet which some one
was always stepping on or falling over. although he was much older
than i was and had been to college, he never tried to lord it over me.
he seemed to be forever smiling and kept all of us in good humor. it
wasnt long before i began to see the doctors good sense in bringing
himin spite of the fact that he knew nothing whatever about sailing or
travel.

on the morning of the fifth day out, just as i was taking the wheel
over from the doctor, bumpo appeared and said,

the salt beef is nearly all gone, sir.

the salt beef! cried the doctor. why, we brought a hundred and
twenty pounds with us. we couldnt have eaten that in five days. what
can have become of it?

[illustration: in these lower levels we came upon the shadowy shapes
of dead ships

_page 360_]

i dont know, sir, im sure. every time i go down to the stores i find
another hunk missing. if it is rats that are eating it, then they are
certainly colossal rodents.

polynesia who was walking up and down a stay-rope taking her morning
exercise, put in,

we must search the hold. if this is allowed to go on we will all be
starving before a week is out. come downstairs with me, tommy, and we
will look into this matter.

so we went downstairs into the store-room and polynesia told us to keep
quite still and listen. this we did. and presently we heard from a dark
corner of the hold the distinct sound of someone snoring.

ah, i thought so, said polynesia. its a manand a big one. climb
in there, both of you, and haul him out. it sounds as though he were
behind that barrelgosh! we seem to have brought half of puddleby with
us. anyone would think we were a penny ferry-boat. such cheek! haul him
out.

so bumpo and i lit a lantern and climbed over the stores. and there,
behind the barrel, sure enough, we found an enormous bearded man fast
asleep with a well-fed look on his face. we woke him up.

washamarrer? he said sleepily.

it was ben butcher, the able seaman.

polynesia spluttered like an angry fire-cracker.

this is the last straw, said she. the one man in the world we least
wanted. shiver my timbers, what cheek!

would it not be, advisable, suggested bumpo, while the varlet is
still sleepy, to strike him on the head with some heavy object and push
him through a port-hole into the sea?

no. wed get into trouble, said polynesia. were not in jolliginki
now, you knowworse luck!besides, there never was a port-hole big
enough to push that man through. bring him upstairs to the doctor.

so we led the man to the wheel where he respectfully touched his cap to
the doctor.

another stowaway, sir, said bumpo smartly.

i thought the poor doctor would have a fit.

good morning, captain, said the man. ben butcher, able seaman, at
your service. i knew youd need me, so i took the liberty of stowing
awaymuch against my conscience. but i just couldnt bear to see you
poor landsmen set out on this voyage without a single real seaman to
help you. youd never have got home alive if i hadnt comewhy look at
your mainsail, sirall loose at the throat. first gust of wind come
along, and away goes your canvas overboardwell, its all right now im
here. well soon get things in shipshape.

no, it isnt all right, said the doctor, its all wrong. and im not
at all glad to see you. i told you in puddleby i didnt want you. you
had no right to come.

but captain, said the able seaman, you cant sail this ship without
me. you dont understand navigation. why, look at the compass now:
youve let her swing a point and a half off her course. its madness
for you to try to do this trip aloneif youll pardon my saying so,
sir. whywhy, youll lose the ship!

look here, said the doctor, a sudden stern look coming into his
eyes, losing a ship is nothing to me. ive lost ships before and it
doesnt bother me in the least. when i set out to go to a place, i get
there. do you understand? i may know nothing whatever about sailing
and navigation, but i get there just the same. now you may be the best
seaman in the world, but on _this_ ship youre just a plain ordinary
nuisancevery plain and very ordinary. and i am now going to call at
the nearest port and put you ashore.

yes, and think yourself lucky, polynesia put in, that you are not
locked up for stowing away and eating all our salt beef.

i dont know what the mischief were going to do now, i heard her
whisper to bumpo. weve no money to buy any more; and that salt beef
was the most important part of the stores.

would it not be good political economy, bumpo whispered back, if
we salted the able seaman and ate him instead? i should judge that he
would weigh more than a hundred and twenty pounds.

how often must i tell you that we are not in jolliginki, snapped
polynesia. those things are not done on white mens shipsstill, she
murmured after a moments thought, its an awfully bright idea. i
dont suppose anybody saw him come on to the shipoh, but heavens! we
havent got enough salt. besides, hed be sure to taste of tobacco.




_the fifth chapter_

polynesia has a plan


then the doctor told me to take the wheel while he made a little
calculation with his map and worked out what new course we should take.

i shall have to run for the capa blancas after all, he told me when
the seamans back was turned. dreadful nuisance! but id sooner swim
back to puddleby than have to listen to that fellows talk all the way
to brazil.

indeed he was a terrible person, this ben butcher. youd think that any
one after being told he wasnt wanted would have had the decency to
keep quiet. but not ben butcher. he kept going round the deck pointing
out all the things we had wrong. according to him there wasnt a thing
right on the whole ship. the anchor was hitched up wrong; the hatches
werent fastened down properly; the sails were put on back to front;
all our knots were the wrong kind of knots.

at last the doctor told him to stop talking and go downstairs. he
refusedsaid he wasnt going to be sunk by landlubbers while he was
still able to stay on deck.

this made us feel a little uneasy. he was such an enormous man there
was no knowing what he might do if he got really obstreperous.

bumpo and i were talking about this downstairs in the dining-saloon
when polynesia, jip and chee-chee came and joined us. and, as usual,
polynesia had a plan.

listen, she said, i am certain this ben butcher is a smuggler and a
bad man. i am a very good judge of seamen, remember, and i dont like
the cut of this mans jib. i

do you really think, i interrupted, that it _is_ safe for the doctor
to cross the atlantic without any regular seamen on his ship?

you see it had upset me quite a good deal to find that all the things
we had been doing were wrong; and i was beginning to wonder what might
happen if we ran into a stormparticularly as miranda had only said the
weather would be good for a certain time; and we seemed to be having so
many delays. but polynesia merely tossed her head scornfully.

oh, bless you, my boy, said she, youre always safe with john
dolittle. remember that. dont take any notice of that stupid old salt.
of course it is perfectly true the doctor does do everything wrong. but
with him it doesnt matter. mark my words, if you travel with john
dolittle you always get there, as you heard him say. ive been with him
lots of times and i know. sometimes the ship is upside down when you
get there, and sometimes its right way up. but you get there just the
same. and then of course theres another thing about the doctor, she
added thoughtfully: he always has extraordinary good luck. he may have
his troubles; but with him things seem to have a habit of turning out
all right in the end. i remember once when we were going through the
straits of magellan the wind was so strong

but what are we going to do about ben butcher? jip put in. you had
some plan polynesia, hadnt you?

yes. what im afraid of is that he may hit the doctor on the head when
hes not looking and make himself captain of the _curlew_. bad sailors
do that sometimes. then they run the ship their own way and take it
where they want. thats what you call a mutiny.

yes, said jip, and we ought to do something pretty quick. we cant
reach the capa blancas before the day after to-morrow at best. i dont
like to leave the doctor alone with him for a minute. he smells like a
very bad man to me.

well, ive got it all worked out, said polynesia. listen: is there a
key in that door?

we looked outside the dining-room and found that there was.

all right, said polynesia. now bumpo lays the table for lunch and
we all go and hide. then at twelve oclock bumpo rings the dinner-bell
down here. as soon as ben hears it hell come down expecting more salt
beef. bumpo must hide behind the door outside. the moment that ben is
seated at the dining-table bumpo slams the door and locks it. then
weve got him. see?

how stratagenious! bumpo chuckled. as cicero said, _parrots cum
parishioners facilime congregation_. ill lay the table at once.

yes and take that worcestershire sauce off the dresser with you when
you go out, said polynesia. dont leave any loose eatables around.
that fellow has had enough to last any man for three days. besides, he
wont be so inclined to start a fight when we put him ashore at the
capa blancas if we thin him down a bit before we let him out.

so we all went and hid ourselves in the passage where we could watch
what happened. and presently bumpo came to the foot of the stairs and
rang the dinner-bell like mad. then he hopped behind the dining-room
door and we all kept still and listened.

almost immediately, _thump_, _thump_, _thump_, down the stairs tramped
ben butcher, the able seaman. he walked into the dining-saloon, sat
himself down at the head of the table in the doctors place, tucked a
napkin under his fat chin and heaved a sigh of expectation.

then, _bang_! bumpo slammed the door and locked it.

that settles _him_ for a while, said polynesia coming out from her
hiding-place. now let him teach navigation to the side-board. gosh,
the cheek of the man! ive forgotten more about the sea than that
lumbering lout will ever know. lets go upstairs and tell the doctor.
bumpo, you will have to serve the meals in the cabin for the next
couple of days.

and bursting into a rollicking norwegian sea-song, she climbed up to my
shoulder and we went on deck.




_the sixth chapter_

the bed-maker of monteverde


we remained three days in the capa blanca islands.

there were two reasons why we stayed there so long when we were really
in such a hurry to get away. one was the shortage in our provisions
caused by the able seamans enormous appetite. when we came to go over
the stores and make a list, we found that he had eaten a whole lot of
other things besides the beef. and having no money, we were sorely
puzzled how to buy more. the doctor went through his trunk to see if
there was anything he could sell. but the only thing he could find
was an old watch with the hands broken and the back dented in; and we
decided this would not bring us in enough money to buy much more than a
pound of tea. bumpo suggested that he sing comic songs in the streets
which he had learned in jolliginki. but the doctor said he did not
think that the islanders would care for african music.

the other thing that kept us was the bullfight. in these islands, which
belonged to spain, they had bullfights every sunday. it was on a friday
that we arrived there; and after we had got rid of the able seaman we
took a walk through the town.

it was a very funny little town, quite different from any that i had
ever seen. the streets were all twisty and winding and so narrow that a
wagon could only just pass along them. the houses over-hung at the top
and came so close together that people in the attics could lean out of
the windows and shake hands with their neighbors on the opposite side
of the street. the doctor told us the town was very, very old. it was
called monteverde.

as we had no money of course we did not go to a hotel or anything like
that. but on the second evening when we were passing by a bed-makers
shop we noticed several beds, which the man had made, standing on
the pavement outside. the doctor started chatting in spanish to the
bed-maker who was sitting at his door whistling to a parrot in a cage.
the doctor and the bed-maker got very friendly talking about birds and
things. and as it grew near to supper-time the man asked us to stop and
sup with him.

this of course we were very glad to do. and after the meal was over
(very nice dishes they were, mostly cooked in olive-oili particularly
liked the fried bananas) we sat outside on the pavement again and went
on talking far into the night.

at last when we got up to go back to our ship, this very nice
shopkeeper wouldnt hear of our going away on any account. he said the
streets down by the harbor were very badly lighted and there was no
moon. we would surely get lost. he invited us to spend the night with
him and go back to our ship in the morning.

well, we finally agreed; and as our good friend had no spare bedrooms,
the three of us, the doctor, bumpo and i, slept on the beds set out for
sale on the pavement before the shop. the night was so hot we needed
no coverings. it was great fun to fall asleep out of doors like this,
watching the people walking to and fro and the gay life of the streets.
it seemed to me that spanish people never went to bed at all. late as
it was, all the little restaurants and cafes around us were wide open,
with customers drinking coffee and chatting merrily at the small tables
outside. the sound of a guitar strumming softly in the distance mingled
with the clatter of chinaware and the babble of voices.

somehow it made me think of my mother and father far away in puddleby,
with their regular habits, the evening practise on the flute and the
restdoing the same thing every day. i felt sort of sorry for them in
a way, because they missed the fun of this traveling life, where we
were doing something new all the timeeven sleeping differently. but
i suppose if they had been invited to go to bed on a pavement in front
of a shop they wouldnt have cared for the idea at all. it is funny how
some people are.

[illustration: the doctor started chatting in spanish to the
bed-maker]




_the seventh chapter_

the doctors wager


next morning we were awakened by a great racket. there was a procession
coming down the street, a number of men in very gay clothes followed
by a large crowd of admiring ladies and cheering children. i asked the
doctor who they were.

they are the bullfighters, he said. there is to be a bullfight
to-morrow.

what is a bullfight? i asked.

to my great surprise the doctor got red in the face with anger. it
reminded me of the time when he had spoken of the lions and tigers in
his private zoo.

a bullfight is a stupid, cruel, disgusting business, said he. these
spanish people are most lovable and hospitable folk. how they can enjoy
these wretched bullfights is a thing i could never understand.

then the doctor went on to explain to me how a bull was first made very
angry by teasing and then allowed to run into a circus where men came
out with red cloaks, waved them at him, and ran away. next the bull was
allowed to tire himself out by tossing and killing a lot of poor, old,
broken-down horses who couldnt defend themselves. then, when the bull
was thoroughly out of breath and wearied by this, a man came out with a
sword and killed the bull.

every sunday, said the doctor, in almost every big town in spain
there are six bulls killed like that and as many horses.

but arent the men ever killed by the bull? i asked.

unfortunately very seldom, said he. a bull is not nearly as
dangerous as he looks, even when hes angry, if you are only quick on
your feet and dont lose your head. these bullfighters are very clever
and nimble. and the people, especially the spanish ladies, think no
end of them. a famous bullfighter (or matador, as they call them) is
a more important man in spain than a kinghere comes another crowd of
them round the corner, look. see the girls throwing kisses to them.
ridiculous business!

at that moment our friend the bed-maker came out to see the procession
go past. and while he was wishing us good morning and enquiring how
we had slept, a friend of his walked up and joined us. the bed-maker
introduced this friend to us as don enrique cardenas.

don enrique when he heard where we were from, spoke to us in english.
he appeared to be a well-educated, gentlemanly sort of person.

and you go to see the bullfight to-morrow, yes? he asked the doctor
pleasantly.

certainly not, said john dolittle firmly. i dont like
bullfightscruel, cowardly shows.

don enrique nearly exploded. i never saw a man get so excited. he told
the doctor that he didnt know what he was talking about. he said
bullfighting was a noble sport and that the matadors were the bravest
men in the world.

oh, rubbish! said the doctor. you never give the poor bull a chance.
it is only when he is all tired and dazed that your precious matadors
dare to try and kill him.

i thought the spaniard was going to strike the doctor he got so angry.
while he was still spluttering to find words, the bed-maker came
between them and took the doctor aside. he explained to john dolittle
in a whisper that this don enrique cardenas was a very important
person; that he it was who supplied the bullsa special, strong black
kindfrom his own farm for all the bullfights in the capa blancas. he
was a very rich man, the bed-maker said, a most important personage. he
mustnt be allowed to take offense on any account.

i watched the doctors face as the bed-maker finished, and i saw a
flash of boyish mischief come into his eyes as though an idea had
struck him. he turned to the angry spaniard.

don enrique, he said, you tell me your bullfighters are very
brave men and skilful. it seems i have offended you by saying that
bullfighting is a poor sport. what is the name of the best matador you
have for to-morrows show?

pepito de malaga, said don enrique, one of the greatest names, one
of the bravest men, in all spain.

very well, said the doctor, i have a proposal to make to you. i
have never fought a bull in my life. now supposing i were to go into
the ring to-morrow with pepito de malaga and any other matadors you
choose; and if i can do more tricks with a bull than they can, would
you promise to do something for me?

don enrique threw back his head and laughed.

man, he said, you must be mad! you would be killed at once. one has
to be trained for years to become a proper bullfighter.

supposing i were willing to take the risk of thatyou are not afraid,
i take it, to accept my offer?

the spaniard frowned.

afraid! he cried, sir, if you can beat pepito de malaga in the
bull-ring ill promise you anything it is possible for me to grant.

very good, said the doctor, now i understand that you are quite a
powerful man in these islands. if you wished to stop all bullfighting
here after to-morrow, you could do it, couldnt you?

yes, said don enrique proudlyi could.

well that is what i ask of youif i win my wager, said john dolittle.
if i can do more with angry bulls than can pepito de malaga, you are
to promise me that there shall never be another bullfight in the capa
blancas so long as you are alive to stop it. is it a bargain?

the spaniard held out his hand.

it is a bargain, he saidi promise. but i must warn you that you
are merely throwing your life away, for you will certainly be killed.
however, that is no more than you deserve for saying that bullfighting
is an unworthy sport. i will meet you here to-morrow morning if you
should wish to arrange any particulars. good day, sir.

as the spaniard turned and walked into the shop with the bed-maker,
polynesia, who had been listening as usual, flew up on to my shoulder
and whispered in my ear,

i have a plan. get hold of bumpo and come some place where the doctor
cant hear us. i want to talk to you.

i nudged bumpos elbow and we crossed the street and pretended to look
into a jewelers window; while the doctor sat down upon his bed to lace
up his boots, the only part of his clothing he had taken off for the
night.

listen, said polynesia, ive been breaking my head trying to think
up some way we can get money to buy those stores with; and at last ive
got it.

the money? said bumpo.

no, stupid. the ideato make the money with. listen: the doctor is
simply bound to win this game to-morrow, sure as youre alive. now all
we have to do is to make a side bet with these spaniardstheyre great
on gamblingand the tricks done.

whats a side bet? i asked.

oh i know what that is, said bumpo proudly. we used to have lots of
them at oxford when boat-racing was on. i go to don enrique and say,
i bet you a hundred pounds the doctor wins. then if he does win, don
enrique pays me a hundred pounds; and if he doesnt, i have to pay don
enrique.

thats the idea, said polynesia. only dont say a hundred pounds:
say two-thousand five-hundred pesetas. now come and find old don
ricky-ticky and try to look rich.

so we crossed the street again and slipped into the bed-makers shop
while the doctor was still busy with his boots.

don enrique, said bumpo, allow me to introduce myself. i am the
crown prince of jolliginki. would you care to have a small bet with me
on to-morrows bullfight?

don enrique bowed.

why certainly, he said, i shall be delighted. but i must warn you
that you are bound to lose. how much?

oh a mere truffle, said bumpojust for the fun of the thing, you
know. what do you say to three-thousand pesetas?

i agree, said the spaniard bowing once more. i will meet you after
the bullfight to-morrow.

so thats all right, said polynesia as we came out to join the
doctor. i feel as though quite a load had been taken off my mind.




_the eighth chapter_

the great bullfight


the next day was a great day in monteverde. all the streets were
hung with flags; and everywhere gaily dressed crowds were to be seen
flocking towards the bull-ring, as the big circus was called where the
fights took place.

the news of the doctors challenge had gone round the town and, it
seemed, had caused much amusement to the islanders. the very idea of
a mere foreigner daring to match himself against the great pepito de
malaga!serve him right if he got killed!

the doctor had borrowed a bullfighters suit from don enrique; and very
gay and wonderful he looked in it, though bumpo and i had hard work
getting the waistcoat to close in front and even then the buttons kept
bursting off it in all directions.

when we set out from the harbor to walk to the bull-ring, crowds of
small boys ran after us making fun of the doctors fatness, calling
out, _juan hagapoco, el grueso matador!_ which is the spanish for,
john dolittle, the fat bullfighter.

as soon as we arrived the doctor said he would like to take a look
at the bulls before the fight began; and we were at once led to the
bull pen where, behind a high railing, six enormous black bulls were
tramping around wildly.

in a few hurried words and signs the doctor told the bulls what he was
going to do and gave them careful instructions for their part of the
show. the poor creatures were tremendously glad when they heard that
there was a chance of bullfighting being stopped; and they promised to
do exactly as they were told.

of course the man who took us in there didnt understand what we were
doing. he merely thought the fat englishman was crazy when he saw the
doctor making signs and talking in ox tongue.

from there the doctor went to the matadors dressing-rooms while bumpo
and i with polynesia made our way into the bull-ring and took our seats
in the great open-air theatre.

it was a very gay sight. thousands of ladies and gentlemen were there,
all dressed in their smartest clothes; and everybody seemed very happy
and cheerful.

right at the beginning don enrique got up and explained to the people
that the first item on the program was to be a match between the
english doctor and pepito de malaga. he told them what he had promised
if the doctor should win. but the people did not seem to think there
was much chance of that. a roar of laughter went up at the very
mention of such a thing.

when pepito came into the ring everybody cheered, the ladies blew
kisses and the men clapped and waved their hats.

presently a large door on the other side of the ring was rolled back
and in galloped one of the bulls; then the door was closed again. at
once the matador became very much on the alert. he waved his red cloak
and the bull rushed at him. pepito stepped nimbly aside and the people
cheered again.

this game was repeated several times. but i noticed that whenever
pepito got into a tight place and seemed to be in real danger from the
bull, an assistant of his, who always hung around somewhere near, drew
the bulls attention upon himself by waving another red cloak. then
the bull would chase the assistant and pepito was left in safety. most
often, as soon as he had drawn the bull off, this assistant ran for the
high fence and vaulted out of the ring to save himself. they evidently
had it all arranged, these matadors; and it didnt seem to me that they
were in any very great danger from the poor clumsy bull so long as they
didnt slip and fall.

after about ten minutes of this kind of thing the small door into the
matadors dressing-room opened and the doctor strolled into the ring.
as soon as his fat figure, dressed in sky-blue velvet, appeared, the
crowd rocked in their seats with laughter.

juan hagapoco, as they had called him, walked out into the centre of
the ring and bowed ceremoniously to the ladies in the boxes. then he
bowed to the bull. then he bowed to pepito. while he was bowing to
pepitos assistant the bull started to rush at him from behind.

look out! look out!the bull! you will be killed! yelled the crowd.

but the doctor calmly finished his bow. then turning round he folded
his arms, fixed the on-rushing bull with his eye and frowned a terrible
frown.

presently a curious thing happened: the bulls speed got slower and
slower. it almost looked as though he were afraid of that frown. soon
he stopped altogether. the doctor shook his finger at him. he began to
tremble. at last, tucking his tail between his legs, the bull turned
round and ran away.

the crowd gasped. the doctor ran after him. round and round the ring
they went, both of them puffing and blowing like grampuses. excited
whispers began to break out among the people. this was something new
in bullfighting, to have the bull running away from the man, instead
of the man away from the bull. at last in the tenth lap, with a final
burst of speed, juan hagapoco, the english matador, caught the poor
bull by the tail.

then leading the now timid creature into the middle of the ring, the
doctor made him do all manner of tricks: standing on the hind legs,
standing on the front legs, dancing, hopping, rolling over. he finished
up by making the bull kneel down; then he got on to his back and did
handsprings and other acrobatics on the beasts horns.

pepito and his assistant had their noses sadly out of joint. the crowd
had forgotten them entirely. they were standing together by the fence
not far from where i sat, muttering to one another and slowly growing
green with jealousy.

finally the doctor turned towards don enriques seat and bowing said in
a loud voice, this bull is no good any more. hes terrified and out of
breath. take him away, please.

does the caballero wish for a fresh bull? asked don enrique.

no, said the doctor, i want five fresh bulls. and i would like them
all in the ring at once, please.

at this a cry of horror burst from the people. they had been used to
seeing matadors escaping from one bull at a time. but _five_!that must
mean certain death.

pepito sprang forward and called to don enrique not to allow it, saying
it was against all the rules of bullfighting. (ha! polynesia
chuckled into my ear. its like the doctors navigation: he breaks all
the rules; but he gets there. if theyll only let him, hell give them
the best show for their money they ever saw.) a great argument began.
half the people seemed to be on pepitos side and half on the doctors
side. at last the doctor turned to pepito and made another very grand
bow which burst the last button off his waistcoat.

[illustration: did acrobatics on the beasts horns]

well, of course if the caballero is afraid he began with a bland
smile.

afraid! screamed pepito. i am afraid of nothing on earth. i am the
greatest matador in spain. with this right hand i have killed nine
hundred and fifty-seven bulls.

all right then, said the doctor, let us see if you can kill five
more. let the bulls in! he shouted. pepito de malaga is not afraid.

a dreadful silence hung over the great theatre as the heavy door into
the bull pen was rolled back. then with a roar the five big bulls
bounded into the ring.

look fierce, i heard the doctor call to them in cattle language.
dont scatter. keep close. get ready for a rush. take pepito, the one
in purple, first. but for heavens sake dont kill him. just chase him
out of the ringnow then, all together, go for him!

the bulls put down their heads and all in line, like a squadron of
cavalry, charged across the ring straight for poor pepito.

for one moment the spaniard tried his hardest to look brave. but the
sight of the five pairs of horns coming at him at full gallop was too
much. he turned white to the lips, ran for the fence, vaulted it and
disappeared.

now the other one, the doctor hissed. and in two seconds the gallant
assistant was nowhere to be seen. juan hagapoco, the fat matador, was
left alone in the ring with five rampaging bulls.

the rest of the show was really well worth seeing. first, all five
bulls went raging round the ring, butting at the fence with their
horns, pawing up the sand, hunting for something to kill. then each one
in turn would pretend to catch sight of the doctor for the first time
and giving a bellow of rage, would lower his wicked looking horns and
shoot like an arrow across the ring as though he meant to toss him to
the sky.

it was really frightfully exciting. and even i, who knew it was all
arranged beforehand, held my breath in terror for the doctors life
when i saw how near they came to sticking him. but just at the last
moment, when the horns points were two inches from the sky-blue
waistcoat, the doctor would spring nimbly to one side and the great
brutes would go thundering harmlessly by, missing him by no more than a
hair.

then all five of them went for him together, completely surrounding
him, slashing at him with their horns and bellowing with fury. how he
escaped alive i dont know. for several minutes his round figure could
hardly be seen at all in that scrimmage of tossing heads, stamping
hoofs and waving tails.it was, as polynesia had prophesied, the
greatest bullfight ever seen.

one woman in the crowd got quite hysterical and screamed up to don
enrique,

stop the fight! stop the fight! he is too brave a man to be killed.
this is the most wonderful matador in the world. let him live! stop the
fight!

but presently the doctor was seen to break loose from the mob of
animals that surrounded him. then catching each of them by the horns,
one after another, he would give their heads a sudden twist and throw
them down flat on the sand. the great fellows acted their parts
extremely well. i have never seen trained animals in a circus do
better. they lay there panting on the ground where the doctor threw
them as if they were exhausted and completely beaten.

then with a final bow to the ladies john dolittle took a cigar from his
pocket, lit it and strolled out of the ring.




_the ninth chapter_

we depart in a hurry


as soon as the door closed behind the doctor the most tremendous noise
i have ever heard broke loose. some of the men appeared to be angry
(friends of pepitos, i suppose); but the ladies called and called to
have the doctor come back into the ring.

when at length he did so, the women seemed to go entirely mad over him.
they blew kisses to him. they called him a darling. then they started
taking off their flowers, their rings, their necklaces, and their
brooches and threw them down at his feet. you never saw anything like
ita perfect shower of jewelry and roses.

but the doctor just smiled up at them, bowed once more and backed out.

now, bumpo, said polynesia, this is where you go down and gather up
all those trinkets and well sell em. thats what the big matadors
do: leave the jewelry on the ground and their assistants collect
it for them. we might as well lay in a good supply of money while
weve got the chanceyou never know when you may need it when youre
traveling with the doctor. never mind the rosesyou can leave thembut
dont leave any rings. and when youve finished go and get your
three-thousand pesetas out of don ricky-ticky. tommy and i will meet
you outside and well pawn the gew-gaws at that jews shop opposite the
bed-makers. run alongand not a word to the doctor, remember.

outside the bull-ring we found the crowd still in a great state of
excitement. violent arguments were going on everywhere. bumpo joined
us with his pockets bulging in all directions; and we made our way
slowly through the dense crowd to that side of the building where the
matadors dressing-room was. the doctor was waiting at the door for us.

good work, doctor! said polynesia, flying on to his shouldergreat
work!but listen: i smell danger. i think you had better get back to
the ship now as quick and as quietly as you can. put your overcoat on
over that giddy suit. i dont like the looks of this crowd. more than
half of them are furious because youve won. don ricky-ticky must now
stop the bullfightingand you know how they love it. what im afraid of
is that some of these matadors who are just mad with jealousy may start
some dirty work. i think this would be a good time for us to get away.

i dare say youre right, polynesia, said the doctoryou usually are.
the crowd does seem to be a bit restless. ill slip down to the ship
aloneso i shant be so noticeable; and ill wait for you there. you
come by some different way. but dont be long about it. hurry!

as soon as the doctor had departed bumpo sought out don enrique and
said,

honorable sir, you owe me three-thousand pesetas.

without a word, but looking cross-eyed with annoyance, don enrique paid
his bet.

we next set out to buy the provisions; and on the way we hired a cab
and took it along with us.

not very far away we found a big grocers shop which seemed to sell
everything to eat. we went in and bought up the finest lot of food you
ever saw in your life.

as a matter of fact, polynesia had been right about the danger we were
in. the news of our victory must have spread like lightning through the
whole town. for as we came out of the shop and loaded the cab up with
our stores, we saw various little knots of angry men hunting round the
streets, waving sticks and shouting,

the englishmen! where are those accursed englishmen who stopped the
bullfighting?hang them to a lamp-post!throw them in the sea! the
englishmen!we want the englishmen!

after that we didnt waste any time, you may be sure. bumpo grabbed the
spanish cab-driver and explained to him in signs that if he didnt
drive down to the harbor as fast as he knew how and keep his mouth shut
the whole way, he would choke the life out of him. then we jumped into
the cab on top of the food, slammed the door, pulled down the blinds
and away we went.

we wont get a chance to pawn the jewelry now, said polynesia, as we
bumped over the cobbly streets. but never mindit may come in handy
later on. and anyway weve got two-thousand five-hundred pesetas left
out of the bet. dont give the cabby more than two pesetas fifty,
bumpo. thats the right fare, i know.

well, we reached the harbor all right and we were mighty glad to find
that the doctor had sent chee-chee back with the row-boat to wait for
us at the landing-wall.

unfortunately while we were in the middle of loading the supplies from
the cab into the boat, the angry mob arrived upon the wharf and made
a rush for us. bumpo snatched up a big beam of wood that lay near
and swung it round and round his head, letting out dreadful african
battle-yells the while. this kept the crowd off while chee-chee and
i hustled the last of the stores into the boat and clambered in
ourselves. bumpo threw his beam of wood into the thick of the spaniards
and leapt in after us. then we pushed off and rowed like mad for the
_curlew_.

the mob upon the wall howled with rage, shook their fists and hurled
stones and all manner of things after us. poor old bumpo got hit on the
head with a bottle. but as he had a very strong head it only raised a
small bump while the bottle smashed into a thousand pieces.

when we reached the ships side the doctor had the anchor drawn up and
the sails set and everything in readiness to get away. looking back we
saw boats coming out from the harbor-wall after us, filled with angry,
shouting men. so we didnt bother to unload our rowboat but just tied
it on to the ships stern with a rope and jumped aboard.

it only took a moment more to swing the _curlew_ round into the wind;
and soon we were speeding out of the harbor on our way to brazil.

ha! sighed polynesia, as we all flopped down on the deck to take a
rest and get our breath. that wasnt a bad adventurequite reminds
me of my old seafaring days when i sailed with the smugglersgolly,
that was the life!never mind your head, bumpo. it will be all right
when the doctor puts a little arnica on it. think what we got out of
the scrap: a boat-load of ships stores, pockets full of jewelry and
thousands of pesetas. not bad, you knownot bad.

[illustration]




part four




_the first chapter_

shellfish languages again


miranda, the purple bird-of-paradise had prophesied rightly when she
had foretold a good spell of weather. for three weeks the good ship
_curlew_ plowed her way through smiling seas before a steady powerful
wind.

i suppose most real sailors would have found this part of the voyage
dull. but not i. as we got further south and further west the face
of the sea seemed different every day. and all the little things of
a voyage which an old hand would have hardly bothered to notice were
matters of great interest for my eager eyes.

we did not pass many ships. when we did see one, the doctor would get
out his telescope and we would all take a look at it. sometimes he
would signal to it, asking for news, by hauling up little colored flags
upon the mast; and the ship would signal back to us in the same way.
the meaning of all the signals was printed in a book which the doctor
kept in the cabin. he told me it was the language of the sea and that
all ships could understand it whether they be english, dutch, or
french.

our greatest happening during those first weeks was passing an iceberg.
when the sun shone on it it burst into a hundred colors, sparkling
like a jeweled palace in a fairy-story. through the telescope we saw
a mother polar bear with a cub sitting on it, watching us. the doctor
recognized her as one of the bears who had spoken to him when he was
discovering the north pole. so he sailed the ship up close and offered
to take her and her baby on to the _curlew_ if she wished it. but she
only shook her head, thanking him; she said it would be far too hot for
the cub on the deck of our ship, with no ice to keep his feet cool. it
had been indeed a very hot day; but the nearness of that great mountain
of ice made us all turn up our coat-collars and shiver with the cold.

during those quiet peaceful days i improved my reading and writing a
great deal with the doctors help. i got on so well that he let me keep
the ships log. this is a big book kept on every ship, a kind of diary,
in which the number of miles run, the direction of your course and
everything else that happens is written down.

the doctor too, in what spare time he had, was nearly always writingin
his note-books. i used to peep into these sometimes, now that i could
read, but i found it hard work to make out the doctors handwriting.
many of these note-books seemed to be about sea things. there were six
thick ones filled full with notes and sketches of different seaweeds;
and there were others on sea birds; others on sea worms; others on
seashells. they were all some day to be re-written, printed and bound
like regular books.

one afternoon we saw, floating around us, great quantities of stuff
that looked like dead grass. the doctor told me this was gulf-weed. a
little further on it became so thick that it covered all the water as
far as the eye could reach; it made the _curlew_ look as though she
were moving across a meadow instead of sailing the atlantic.

crawling about upon this weed, many crabs were to be seen. and the
sight of them reminded the doctor of his dream of learning the language
of the shellfish. he fished several of these crabs up with a net and
put them in his listening-tank to see if he could understand them.
among the crabs he also caught a strange-looking, chubby, little fish
which he told me was called a silver fidgit.

after he had listened to the crabs for a while with no success, he put
the fidgit into the tank and began to listen to that. i had to leave
him at this moment to go and attend to some duties on the deck. but
presently i heard him below shouting for me to come down again.

stubbins, he cried as soon as he saw mea most extraordinary
thingquite unbelievableim not sure whether im dreamingcant
believe my own senses. iii

[illustration: he talks english!]

why, doctor, i said, what is it?whats the matter?

the fidgit, he whispered, pointing with a trembling finger to the
listening-tank in which the little round fish was still swimming
quietly, he talks english! andandand _he whistles tunes_english
tunes!

talks english! i criedwhistles!why, its impossible.

its a fact, said the doctor, white in the face with excitement.
its only a few words, scattered, with no particular sense to themall
mixed up with his own language which i cant make out yet. but theyre
english words, unless theres something very wrong with my hearingand
the tune he whistles, its as plain as anythingalways the same tune.
now you listen and tell me what you make of it. tell me everything you
hear. dont miss a word.

i went to the glass tank upon the table while the doctor grabbed a
note-book and a pencil. undoing my collar i stood upon the empty
packing-case he had been using for a stand and put my right ear down
under the water.

for some moments i detected nothing at allexcept, with my dry ear, the
heavy breathing of the doctor as he waited, all stiff and anxious, for
me to say something. at last from within the water, sounding like a
child singing miles and miles away, i heard an unbelievably thin, small
voice.

ah! i said.

what is it? asked the doctor in a hoarse, trembly whisper. what does
he say?

i cant quite make it out, i said. its mostly in some strange fish
languageoh, but wait a minute!yes, now i get itno smoking.... my,
heres a queer one! popcorn and picture postcards here.... this
way out.... dont spitwhat funny things to say, doctor!oh, but
wait!now hes whistling the tune.

what tune is it? gasped the doctor.

john peel.

ah hah, cried the doctor, thats what i made it out to be. and he
wrote furiously in his note-book.

i went on listening.

this is most extraordinary, the doctor kept muttering to himself
as his pencil went wiggling over the pagemost extraordinarybut
frightfully thrilling. i wonder where he

heres some more, i criedsome more english.... _the big tank needs
cleaning_.... thats all. now hes talking fish-talk again.

the big tank! the doctor murmured frowning in a puzzled kind of way.
i wonder where on earth he learned

then he bounded up out of his chair.

i have it, he yelled, this fish has escaped from an aquarium.
why, of course! look at the kind of things he has learned: picture
postcardsthey always sell them in aquariums; dont spit; no
smoking; this way outthe things the attendants say. and then, my,
heres a queer one! thats the kind of thing that people exclaim
when they look into the tanks. it all fits. theres no doubt about
it, stubbins: we have here a fish who has escaped from captivity. and
its quite possiblenot certain, by any means, but quite possiblethat
i may now, through him, be able to establish communication with the
shellfish. this is a great piece of luck.




_the second chapter_

the fidgits story


well, now that he was started once more upon his old hobby of the
shellfish languages, there was no stopping the doctor. he worked right
through the night.

a little after midnight i fell asleep in a chair; about two in the
morning bumpo fell asleep at the wheel; and for five hours the _curlew_
was allowed to drift where she liked. but still john dolittle worked
on, trying his hardest to understand the fidgits language, struggling
to make the fidgit understand him.

when i woke up it was broad daylight again. the doctor was still
standing at the listening-tank, looking as tired as an owl and
dreadfully wet. but on his face there was a proud and happy smile.

stubbins, he said as soon as he saw me stir, ive done it. ive
got the key to the fidgits language. its a frightfully difficult
languagequite different from anything i ever heard. the only thing it
reminds me ofslightlyis ancient hebrew. it isnt shellfish; but its
a big step towards it. now, the next thing, i want you to take a pencil
and a fresh notebook and write down everything i say. the fidgit has
promised to tell me the story of his life. i will translate it into
english and you put it down in the book. are you ready?

once more the doctor lowered his ear beneath the level of the water;
and as he began to speak, i started to write. and this is the story
that the fidgit told us.


    thirteen months in an aquarium

    i was born in the pacific ocean, close to the coast
    of chile. i was one of a family of two-thousand
    five-hundred and ten. soon after our mother and father
    left us, we youngsters got scattered. the family was
    broken upby a herd of whales who chased us. i and
    my sister, clippa (she was my favorite sister) had a
    very narrow escape for our lives. as a rule, whales
    are not very hard to get away from if you are good at
    dodgingif youve only got a quick swerve. but this
    one that came after clippa and myself was a very mean
    whale. every time he lost us under a stone or something
    hed come back and hunt and hunt till he routed us
    out into the open again. i never saw such a nasty,
    persevering brute.

    well, we shook him at lastthough not before he had
    worried us for hundreds of miles northward, up the
    west coast of south america. but luck was against us
    that day. while we were resting and trying to get our
    breath, another family of fidgits came rushing by,
    shouting, come on! swim for your lives! the dog-fish
    are coming!

    now dog-fish are particularly fond of fidgits. we are,
    you might say, their favorite foodand for that reason
    we always keep away from deep, muddy waters. whats
    more, dog-fish are not easy to escape from; they are
    terribly fast and clever hunters. so up we had to jump
    and on again.

    after we had gone a few more hundred miles we looked
    back and saw that the dog-fish were gaining on us. so
    we turned into a harbor. it happened to be one on the
    west coast of the united states. here we guessed, and
    hoped, the dog-fish would not be likely to follow us.
    as it happened, they didnt even see us turn in, but
    dashed on northward and we never saw them again. i hope
    they froze to death in the arctic seas.

    but, as i said, luck was against us that day. while
    i and my sister were cruising gently round the ships
    anchored in the harbor looking for orange-peels, a
    great delicacy with us_swoop! bang!_we were caught in
    a net.

    we struggled for all we were worth; but it was no use.
    the net was small-meshed and strongly made. kicking
    and flipping we were hauled up the side of the ship
    and dumped down on the deck, high and dry in a blazing
    noon-day sun.

    here a couple of old men in whiskers and spectacles
    leant over us, making strange sounds. some codling had
    got caught in the net the same time as we were. these
    the old men threw back into the sea; but us they seemed
    to think very precious. they put us carefully into a
    large jar and after they had taken us on shore they
    went to a big house and changed us from the jar into
    glass boxes full of water. this house was on the edge
    of the harbor; and a small stream of sea-water was made
    to flow through the glass tank so we could breathe
    properly. of course we had never lived inside glass
    walls before; and at first we kept on trying to swim
    through them and got our noses awfully sore bumping the
    glass at full speed.

    then followed weeks and weeks of weary idleness. they
    treated us well, so far as they knew how. the old
    fellows in spectacles came and looked at us proudly
    twice a day and saw that we had the proper food to eat,
    the right amount of light and that the water was not
    too hot or too cold. but oh, the dullness of that life!
    it seemed we were a kind of a show. at a certain hour
    every morning the big doors of the house were thrown
    open and everybody in the city who had nothing special
    to do came in and looked at us. there were other tanks
    filled with different kinds of fishes all round the
    walls of the big room. and the crowds would go from
    tank to tank, looking in at us through the glasswith
    their mouths open, like half-witted flounders. we got
    so sick of it that we used to open our mouths back at
    them; and this they seemed to think highly comical.

    one day my sister said to me, think you, brother,
    that these strange creatures who have captured us can
    talk?

    surely, said i, have you not noticed that some talk
    with the lips only, some with the whole face, and yet
    others discourse with the hands? when they come quite
    close to the glass you can hear them. listen!

    at that moment a female, larger than the rest, pressed
    her nose up against the glass, pointed at me and said
    to her young behind her, oh, look, heres a queer one!

    and then we noticed that they nearly always said this
    when they looked in. and for a long time we thought
    that such was the whole extent of the language, this
    being a people of but few ideas. to help pass away the
    weary hours we learned it by heart, oh, look, heres
    a queer one! but we never got to know what it meant.
    other phrases, however, we did get the meaning of; and
    we even learned to read a little in man-talk. many big
    signs there were, set up upon the walls; and when we
    saw that the keepers stopped the people from spitting
    and smoking, pointed to these signs angrily and read
    them out loud, we knew then that these writings
    signified, _no smoking_ and _dont spit_.

    then in the evenings, after the crowd had gone, the
    same aged male with one leg of wood, swept up the
    peanut-shells with a broom every night. and while
    he was so doing he always whistled the same tune to
    himself. this melody we rather liked; and we learned
    that too by heartthinking it was part of the language.

    thus a whole year went by in this dismal place. some
    days new fishes were brought in to the other tanks;
    and other days old fishes were taken out. at first we
    had hoped we would only be kept here for a while, and
    that after we had been looked at sufficiently we would
    be returned to freedom and the sea. but as month after
    month went by, and we were left undisturbed, our hearts
    grew heavy within our prison-walls of glass and we
    spoke to one another less and less.

    one day, when the crowd was thickest in the big room,
    a woman with a red face fainted from the heat. i
    watched through the glass and saw that the rest of the
    people got highly excitedthough to me it did not seem
    to be a matter of very great importance. they threw
    cold water on her and carried her out into the open air.

    this made me think mightily; and presently a great
    idea burst upon me.

    sister, i said, turning to poor clippa who was
    sulking at the bottom of our prison trying to hide
    behind a stone from the stupid gaze of the children who
    thronged about our tank, supposing that _we_ pretended
    we were sick: do you think they would take us also from
    this stuffy house?

    brother, said she wearily, that they might do. but
    most likely they would throw us on a rubbish-heap,
    where we would die in the hot sun.

    but, said i, why should they go abroad to seek
    a rubbish-heap, when the harbor is so close? while
    we were being brought here i saw men throwing their
    rubbish into the water. if they would only throw us
    also there, we could quickly reach the sea.

    the sea! murmured poor clippa with a far-away look
    in her eyes (she had fine eyes, had my sister, clippa).
    how like a dream it soundsthe sea! oh brother, will
    we ever swim in it again, think you? every night as i
    lie awake on the floor of this evil-smelling dungeon i
    hear its hearty voice ringing in my ears. how i have
    longed for it! just to feel it once again, the nice,
    big, wholesome homeliness of it all! to jump, just to
    jump from the crest of an atlantic wave, laughing in
    the trade winds spindrift, down into the blue-green
    swirling trough! to chase the shrimps on a summer
    evening, when the sky is red and the lights all pink
    within the foam! to lie on the top, in the doldrums
    noonday calm, and warm your tummy in the tropic sun!
    to wander hand in hand once more through the giant
    seaweed forests of the indian ocean, seeking the
    delicious eggs of the pop-pop! to play hide-and-seek
    among the castles of the coral towns with their pearl
    and jasper windows spangling the floor of the spanish
    main! to picnic in the anemone-meadows, dim blue
    and lilac-gray, that lie in the lowlands beyond the
    south sea garden! to throw somersaults on the springy
    sponge-beds of the mexican gulf! to poke about among
    the dead ships and see what wonders and adventures lie
    inside!and then, on winter nights when the northeaster
    whips the water into froth, to swoop down and down to
    get away from the cold, down to where the waters warm
    and dark, down and still down, till we spy the twinkle
    of the fire-eels far below where our friends and
    cousins sit chatting round the council grottochatting,
    brother, over the news and gossip of _the sea_!... oh

    and then she broke down completely, sniffling.

    stop it! i said. you make me homesick. look here:
    lets pretend were sickor better still, lets pretend
    were dead; and see what happens. if they throw us on a
    rubbish-heap and we fry in the sun, well not be much
    worse off than we are here in this smelly prison. what
    do you say? will you risk it?

    i will, she saidand gladly.

    so next morning two fidgits were found by the keeper
    floating on the top of the water in their tank, stiff
    and dead. we gave a mighty good imitation of dead
    fishalthough i say it myself. the keeper ran and
    got the old gentlemen with spectacles and whiskers.
    they threw up their hands in horror when they saw us.
    lifting us carefully out of the water they laid us on
    wet cloths. that was the hardest part of all. if youre
    a fish and get taken out of the water you have to keep
    opening and shutting your mouth to breathe at alland
    even that you cant keep up for long. and all this time
    we had to stay stiff as sticks and breathe silently
    through half-closed lips.

    well, the old fellows poked us and felt us and pinched
    us till i thought theyd never be done. then, when
    their backs were turned a moment, a wretched cat got
    up on the table and nearly ate us. luckily the old
    men turned round in time and shooed her away. you may
    be sure though that we took a couple of good gulps
    of air while they werent looking; and that was the
    only thing that saved us from choking. i wanted to
    whisper to clippa to be brave and stick it out. but i
    couldnt even do that; because, as you know, most kinds
    of fish-talk cannot be heardnot even a shoutunless
    youre under water.

    then, just as we were about to give it up and let on
    that we were alive, one of the old men shook his head
    sadly, lifted us up and carried us out of the building.

    now for it! i thought to myself. well soon know
    our fate: liberty or the garbage-can.

    outside, to our unspeakable horror, he made straight
    for a large ash-barrel which stood against the wall on
    the other side of a yard. most happily for us, however,
    while he was crossing this yard a very dirty man with a
    wagon and horses drove up and took the ash-barrel away.
    i suppose it was his property.

    then the old man looked around for some other place to
    throw us. he seemed about to cast us upon the ground.
    but he evidently thought that this would make the yard
    untidy and he desisted. the suspense was terrible. he
    moved outside the yard-gate and my heart sank once more
    as i saw that he now intended to throw us in the gutter
    of the roadway. but (fortune was indeed with us that
    day), a large man in blue clothes and silver buttons
    stopped him in the nick of time. evidently, from the
    way the large man lectured and waved a short thick
    stick, it was against the rules of the town to throw
    dead fish in the streets.

    at last, to our unutterable joy, the old man turned
    and moved off with us towards the harbor. he walked so
    slowly, muttering to himself all the way and watching
    the man in blue out of the corner of his eye, that i
    wanted to bite his finger to make him hurry up. both
    clippa and i were actually at our last gasp.

    finally he reached the sea-wall and giving us one last
    sad look he dropped us into the waters of the harbor.

    never had we realized anything like the thrill of
    that moment, as we felt the salt wetness close over
    our heads. with one flick of our tails we came to life
    again. the old man was so surprised that he fell right
    into the water, almost on top of us. from this he was
    rescued by a sailor with a boat-hook; and the last we
    saw of him, the man in blue was dragging him away by
    the coat-collar, lecturing him again. apparently it was
    also against the rules of the town to throw dead fish
    into the harbor.

    but we?what time or thought had we for his troubles?
    _we were free!_ in lightning leaps, in curving spurts,
    in crazy zig-zagswhooping, shrieking with delight, we
    sped for home and the open sea!

    that is all of my story and i will now, as i promised
    last night, try to answer any questions you may ask
    about the sea, on condition that i am set at liberty as
    soon as you have done.

    _the doctor:_ is there any part of the sea deeper than
    that known as the nero deepi mean the one near the
    island of guam?

    _the fidgit:_ why, certainly. theres one much deeper
    than that near the mouth of the amazon river. but its
    small and hard to find. we call it the deep hole. and
    theres another in the antarctic sea.

    _the doctor:_ can you talk any shellfish language
    yourself?

    _the fidgit:_ no, not a word. we regular fishes dont
    have anything to do with the shellfish. we consider
    them a low class.

    _the doctor:_ but when youre near them, can you hear
    the sound they make talkingi mean without necessarily
    understanding what they say?

    _the fidgit:_ only with the very largest ones.
    shellfish have such weak small voices it is almost
    impossible for any but their own kind to hear them. but
    with the bigger ones it is different. they make a sad,
    booming noise, rather like an iron pipe being knocked
    with a stoneonly not nearly so loud of course.

    _the doctor:_ i am most anxious to get down to the
    bottom of the seato study many things. but we land
    animals, as you no doubt know, are unable to breathe
    under water. have you any ideas that might help me?

    _the fidgit:_ i think that for both your difficulties
    the best thing for you to do would be to try and get
    hold of the great glass sea snail.

    _the doctor:_ erwho, or what, is the great glass sea
    snail?

    _the fidgit:_ he is an enormous salt-water snail,
    one of the winkle family, but as large as a big house.
    he talks quite loudlywhen he speaks, but this is not
    often. he can go to any part of the ocean, at all
    depths because he doesnt have to be afraid of any
    creature in the sea. his shell is made of transparent
    mother-o-pearl so that you can see through it; but
    its thick and strong. when he is out of his shell
    and he carries it empty on his back, there is room in
    it for a wagon and a pair of horses. he has been seen
    carrying his food in it when traveling.

    _the doctor:_ i feel that that is just the creature
    i have been looking for. he could take me and my
    assistant inside his shell and we could explore the
    deepest depths in safety. do you think you could get
    him for me?

    _the fidgit:_ alas! no. i would willingly if i could;
    but he is hardly ever seen by ordinary fish. he lives
    at the bottom of the deep hole, and seldom comes
    outand into the deep hole, the lower waters of which
    are muddy, fishes such as we are afraid to go.

    _the doctor:_ dear me! thats a terrible
    disappointment. are there many of this kind of snail in
    the sea?

    _the fidgit:_ oh no. he is the only one in existence,
    since his second wife died long, long ago. he is the
    last of the giant shellfish. he belongs to past ages
    when the whales were land-animals and all that. they
    say he is over seventy thousand years old.

    _the doctor:_ good gracious, what wonderful things he
    could tell me! i do wish i could meet him.

    _the fidgit:_ were there any more questions you wished
    to ask me? this water in your tank is getting quite
    warm and sickly. id like to be put back into the sea
    as soon as you can spare me.

    _the doctor:_ just one more thing: when christopher
    columbus crossed the atlantic in 1492, he threw
    overboard two copies of his diary sealed up in barrels.
    one of them was never found. it must have sunk. i would
    like to get it for my library. do you happen to know
    where it is?

    _the fidgit:_ yes, i do. that too is in the deep hole.
    when the barrel sank the currents drifted it northwards
    down what we call the orinoco slope, till it finally
    disappeared into the deep hole. if it was any other
    part of the sea id try and get it for you; but not
    there.

    _the doctor:_ well, that is all, i think. i hate to
    put you back into the sea, because i know that as soon
    as i do, ill think of a hundred other questions i
    wanted to ask you. but i must keep my promise. would
    you care for anything before you go?it seems a cold
    daysome cracker-crumbs or something?

    _the fidgit:_ no, i wont stop. all i want just at
    present is fresh sea-water.

    _the doctor:_ i cannot thank you enough for all the
    information you have given me. you have been very
    helpful and patient.

    _the fidgit:_ pray do not mention it. it has been a
    real pleasure to be of assistance to the great john
    dolittle. you are, as of course you know, already quite
    famous among the better class of fishes. goodbye!and
    good luck to you, to your ship and to all your plans!

the doctor carried the listening-tank to a port-hole, opened it and
emptied the tank into the sea.

good-bye! he murmured as a faint splash reached us from without.

i dropped my pencil on the table and leaned back with a sigh. my
fingers were so stiff with writers cramp that i felt as though i
should never be able to open my hand again. but i, at least, had had
a nights sleep. as for the poor doctor, he was so weary that he had
hardly put the tank back upon the table and dropped into a chair, when
his eyes closed and he began to snore.

in the passage outside polynesia scratched angrily at the door. i rose
and let her in.

a nice state of affairs! she stormed. what sort of a ship is this?
theres that colored man upstairs asleep under the wheel; the doctor
asleep down here; and you making pot-hooks in a copybook with a
pencil! expect the ship to steer herself to brazil? were just drifting
around the sea like an empty bottleand a week behind time as it is.
whats happened to you all?

she was so angry that her voice rose to a scream. but it would have
taken more than that to wake the doctor.

i put the note-book carefully in a drawer and went on deck to take the
wheel.




_the third chapter_

bad weather


as soon as i had the _curlew_ swung round upon her course again i
noticed something peculiar: we were not going as fast as we had been.
our favorable wind had almost entirely disappeared.

this, at first, we did not worry about, thinking that at any moment it
might spring up again. but the whole day went by; then two days; then
a week,ten days, and the wind grew no stronger. the _curlew_ just
dawdled along at the speed of a toddling babe.

i now saw that the doctor was becoming uneasy. he kept getting out his
sextant (an instrument which tells you what part of the ocean you are
in) and making calculations. he was forever looking at his maps and
measuring distances on them. the far edge of the sea, all around us, he
examined with his telescope a hundred times a day.

but doctor, i said when i found him one afternoon mumbling to himself
about the misty appearance of the sky, it wouldnt matter so much,
would it, if we did take a little longer over the trip? weve got
plenty to eat on board now; and the purple bird-of-paradise will know
that we have been delayed by something that we couldnt help.

yes, i suppose so, he said thoughtfully. but i hate to keep her
waiting. at this season of the year she generally goes to the peruvian
mountainsfor her health. and besides, the good weather she prophesied
is likely to end any day now and delay us still further. if we could
only keep moving at even a fair speed, i wouldnt mind. its this
hanging around, almost dead still, that gets me restlessah, here comes
a windnot very strongbut maybe itll grow.

a gentle breeze from the northeast came singing through the ropes; and
we smiled up hopefully at the _curlews_ leaning masts.

weve only got another hundred and fifty miles to make, to sight the
coast of brazil, said the doctor. if that wind would just stay with
us, steady, for a full day wed see land.

but suddenly the wind changed, swung to the east, then back to the
northeastthen to the north. it came in fitful gusts, as though it
hadnt made up its mind which way to blow; and i was kept busy at the
wheel, swinging the _curlew_ this way and that to keep the right side
of it.

presently we heard polynesia, who was in the rigging keeping a look-out
for land or passing ships, screech down to us,

bad weather coming. that jumpy wind is an ugly sign. and look!over
there in the eastsee that black line, low down? if that isnt a
storm im a land-lubber. the gales round here are fierce, when they
do blowtear your canvas out like paper. you take the wheel, doctor:
itll need a strong arm if its a real storm. ill go wake bumpo and
chee-chee. this looks bad to me. wed best get all the sail down right
away, till we see how strong shes going to blow.

indeed the whole sky was now beginning to take on a very threatening
look. the black line to the eastward grew blacker as it came nearer
and nearer. a low, rumbly, whispering noise went moaning over the sea.
the water which had been so blue and smiling turned to a ruffled ugly
gray. and across the darkening sky, shreds of cloud swept like tattered
witches flying from the storm.

i must confess i was frightened. you see i had only so far seen the
sea in friendly moods: sometimes quiet and lazy; sometimes laughing,
venturesome and reckless; sometimes brooding and poetic, when moonbeams
turned her ripples into silver threads and dreaming snowy night-clouds
piled up fairy-castles in the sky. but as yet i had not known, or even
guessed at, the terrible strength of the seas wild anger.

when that storm finally struck us we leaned right over flatly on our
side, as though some invisible giant had slapped the poor _curlew_ on
the cheek.

after that things happened so thick and so fast that what with the wind
that stopped your breath, the driving, blinding water, the deafening
noise and the rest, i havent a very clear idea of how our shipwreck
came about.

i remember seeing the sails, which we were now trying to roll up upon
the deck, torn out of our hands by the wind and go overboard like a
penny balloonvery nearly carrying chee-chee with them. and i have a
dim recollection of polynesia screeching somewhere for one of us to go
downstairs and close the port-holes.

in spite of our masts being bare of sail we were now scudding along
to the southward at a great pace. but every once in a while huge
gray-black waves would arise from under the ships side like nightmare
monsters, swell and climb, then crash down upon us, pressing us into
the sea; and the poor _curlew_ would come to a standstill, half under
water, like a gasping, drowning pig.

while i was clambering along towards the wheel to see the doctor,
clinging like a leech with hands and legs to the rails lest i be blown
overboard, one of these tremendous seas tore loose my hold, filled my
throat with water and swept me like a cork the full length of the deck.
my head struck a door with an awful bang. and then i fainted.




_the fourth chapter_

wrecked!


when i awoke i was very hazy in my head. the sky was blue and the sea
was calm. at first i thought that i must have fallen asleep in the sun
on the deck of the _curlew_. and thinking that i would be late for my
turn at the wheel, i tried to rise to my feet. i found i couldnt; my
arms were tied to something behind me with a piece of rope. by twisting
my neck around i found this to be a mast, broken off short. then i
realized that i wasnt sitting on a ship at all; i was only sitting on
a piece of one. i began to feel uncomfortably scared. screwing up my
eyes, i searched the rim of the sea north, east, south and west: no
land: no ships; nothing was in sight. i was alone in the ocean!

at last, little by little, my bruised head began to remember what had
happened: first, the coming of the storm; the sails going overboard;
then the big wave which had banged me against the door. but what had
become of the doctor and the others? what day was this, to-morrow or
the day after?and why was i sitting on only part of a ship?

[illustration: i was alone in the ocean!]

working my hand into my pocket, i found my penknife and cut the rope
that tied me. this reminded me of a shipwreck story which joe had once
told me, of a captain who had tied his son to a mast in order that he
shouldnt be washed overboard by the gale. so of course it must have
been the doctor who had done the same to me.

but where was he?

the awful thought came to me that the doctor and the rest of
them must be drowned, since there was no other wreckage to be
seen upon the waters. i got to my feet and stared around the sea
againnothingnothing but water and sky!

presently a long way off i saw the small dark shape of a bird skimming
low down over the swell. when it came quite close i saw it was a stormy
petrel. i tried to talk to it, to see if it could give me news. but
unluckily i hadnt learned much seabird language and i couldnt even
attract its attention, much less make it understand what i wanted.

twice it circled round my raft, lazily, with hardly a flip of the
wing. and i could not help wondering, in spite of the distress i was
in, where it had spent last nighthow it, or any other living thing,
had weathered such a smashing storm. it made me realize the great big
difference between different creatures; and that size and strength are
not everything. to this petrel, a frail little thing of feathers, much
smaller and weaker than i, the sea could do anything she liked, it
seemed; and his only answer was a lazy, saucy flip of the wing! _he_
was the one who should be called the _able seaman_. for, come raging
gale, come sunlit calm, this wilderness of water was his home.

after swooping over the sea around me (just looking for food, i
supposed) he went off in the direction from which he had come. and i
was alone once more.

i found i was somewhat hungryand a little thirsty too. i began to
think all sorts of miserable thoughts, the way one does when he is
lonesome and has missed breakfast. what was going to become of me now,
if the doctor and the rest were drowned? i would starve to death or
die of thirst. then the sun went behind some clouds and i felt cold.
how many hundreds or thousands of miles was i from any land? what if
another storm should come and smash up even this poor raft on which i
stood?

i went on like this for a while, growing gloomier and gloomier, when
suddenly i thought of polynesia. youre always safe with the doctor,
she had said. he gets there. remember that.

im sure i wouldnt have minded so much if he had been here with me. it
was this being all alone that made me want to weep. and yet the petrel
was alone!what a baby i was, i told myself, to be scared to the verge
of tears just by loneliness! i was quite safe where i wasfor the
present anyhow. john dolittle wouldnt get scared by a little thing
like this. he only got excited when he made a discovery, found a new
bug or something. and if what polynesia had said was true, he couldnt
be drowned and things would come out all right in the end somehow.

i threw out my chest, buttoned up my collar and began walking up and
down the short raft to keep warm. i would be like john dolittle. i
wouldnt cryand i wouldnt get excited.

how long i paced back and forth i dont know. but it was a long
timefor i had nothing else to do.

at last i got tired and lay down to rest. and in spite of all my
troubles, i soon fell fast asleep.

this time when i woke up, stars were staring down at me out of a
cloudless sky. the sea was still calm; and my strange craft was rocking
gently under me on an easy swell. all my fine courage left me as i
gazed up into the big silent night and felt the pains of hunger and
thirst set to work in my stomach harder than ever.

are you awake? said a high silvery voice at my elbow.

i sprang up as though some one had stuck a pin in me. and there,
perched at the very end of my raft, her beautiful golden tail glowing
dimly in the starlight, sat miranda, the purple bird-of-paradise!

never have i been so glad to see any one in my life. i almost fell into
the water as i leapt to hug her.

i didnt want to wake you, said she. i guessed you must be tired
after all youve been throughdont squash the life out of me, boy: im
not a stuffed duck, you know.

oh, miranda, you dear old thing, said i, im so glad to see you.
tell me, where is the doctor? is he alive?

of course hes aliveand its my firm belief he always will be. hes
over there, about forty miles to the westward.

whats he doing there?

hes sitting on the other half of the _curlew_ shaving himselfor he
was, when i left him.

well, thank heaven hes alive! said iand bumpoand the animals, are
they all right?

yes, theyre with him. your ship broke in half in the storm. the
doctor had tied you down when he found you stunned. and the part you
were on got separated and floated away. golly, it _was_ a storm! one
has to be a gull or an albatross to stand that sort of weather. i had
been watching for the doctor for three weeks, from a cliff-top; but
last night i had to take refuge in a cave to keep my tail-feathers from
blowing out. as soon as i found the doctor, he sent me off with some
porpoises to help us in our search. there had been quite a gathering
of sea-birds waiting to greet the doctor; but the rough weather sort of
broke up the arrangements that had been made to welcome him properly.
it was the petrel that first gave us the tip where you were.

well, but how can i get to the doctor, miranda?i havent any oars.

get to him!why, youre going to him now. look behind you.

i turned around. the moon was just rising on the seas edge. and i now
saw that my raft was moving through the water, but so gently that i had
not noticed it before.

whats moving us? i asked.

the porpoises, said miranda.

i went to the back of the raft and looked down into the water. and just
below the surface i could see the dim forms of four big porpoises,
their sleek skins glinting in the moonlight, pushing at the raft with
their noses.

theyre old friends of the doctors, said miranda. theyd do
anything for john dolittle. we should see his party soon now. were
pretty near the place i left themyes, there they are! see that dark
shape?no, more to the right of where youre looking. cant you
make out the figure of the black man standing against the sky?now
chee-chee spies ushes waving. dont you see them?

i didntfor my eyes were not as sharp as mirandas. but presently from
somewhere in the murky dusk i heard bumpo singing his african comic
songs with the full force of his enormous voice. and in a little, by
peering and peering in the direction of the sound, i at last made out a
dim mass of tattered, splintered wreckageall that remained of the poor
_curlew_floating low down upon the water.

a hulloa came through the night. and i answered it. we kept it up,
calling to one another back and forth across the calm night sea. and a
few minutes later the two halves of our brave little ruined ship bumped
gently together again.

now that i was nearer and the moon was higher i could see more plainly.
their half of the ship was much bigger than mine.

it lay partly upon its side; and most of them were perched upon the top
munching ships biscuit.

but close down to the edge of the water, using the seas calm surface
for a mirror and a piece of broken bottle for a razor, john dolittle
was shaving his face by the light of the moon.




_the fifth chapter_

land!


they all gave me a great greeting as i clambered off my half of the
ship on to theirs. bumpo brought me a wonderful drink of fresh water
which he drew from a barrel; and chee-chee and polynesia stood around
me feeding me ships biscuit.

but it was the sight of the doctors smiling facejust knowing that i
was with him once againthat cheered me more than anything else. as i
watched him carefully wipe his glass razor and put it away for future
use, i could not help comparing him in my mind with the stormy petrel.
indeed the vast strange knowledge which he had gained from his speech
and friendship with animals had brought him the power to do things
which no other human being would dare to try. like the petrel, he could
apparently play with the sea in all her moods. it was no wonder that
many of the ignorant savage peoples among whom he passed in his voyages
made statues of him showing him as half a fish, half a bird, and half
a man. and ridiculous though it was, i could quite understand what
miranda meant when she said she firmly believed that he could never
die. just to be with him gave you a wonderful feeling of comfort and
safety.

except for his appearance (his clothes were crumpled and damp and his
battered high hat was stained with salt water) that storm which had
so terrified me had disturbed him no more than getting stuck on the
mud-bank in puddleby river.

politely thanking miranda for getting me so quickly, he asked her
if she would now go ahead of us and show us the way to spidermonkey
island. next, he gave orders to the porpoises to leave my old piece of
the ship and push the bigger half wherever the bird-of-paradise should
lead us.

how much he had lost in the wreck besides his razor i did not
knoweverything, most likely, together with all the money he had saved
up to buy the ship with. and still he was smiling as though he wanted
for nothing in the world. the only things he had saved, as far as
i could seebeyond the barrel of water and bag of biscuitwere his
precious note-books. these, i saw when he stood up, he had strapped
around his waist with yards and yards of twine. he was, as old matthew
mugg used to say, a great man. he was unbelievable.

and now for three days we continued our journey slowly but
steadilysouthward.

the only inconvenience we suffered from was the cold. this seemed
to increase as we went forward. the doctor said that the island,
disturbed from its usual paths by the great gale, had evidently drifted
further south than it had ever been before.

on the third night poor miranda came back to us nearly frozen. she told
the doctor that in the morning we would find the island quite close to
us, though we couldnt see it now as it was a misty dark night. she
said that she must hurry back at once to a warmer climate; and that she
would visit the doctor in puddleby next august as usual.

dont forget, miranda, said john dolittle, if you should hear
anything of what happened to long arrow, to get word to me.

the bird-of-paradise assured him she would. and after the doctor had
thanked her again and again for all that she had done for us, she
wished us good luck and disappeared into the night.

we were all awake early in the morning, long before it was light,
waiting for our first glimpse of the country we had come so far to see.
and as the rising sun turned the eastern sky to gray, of course it
was old polynesia who first shouted that she could see palm-trees and
mountain tops.

with the growing light it became plain to all of us: a long island with
high rocky mountains in the middleand so near to us that you could
almost throw your hat upon the shore.

the porpoises gave us one last push and our strange-looking craft
bumped gently on a low beach. then, thanking our lucky stars for
a chance to stretch our cramped legs, we all bundled off on to the
landthe first land, even though it was floating land, that we had
trodden for six weeks. what a thrill i felt as i realized that
spidermonkey island, the little spot in the atlas which my pencil had
touched, lay at last beneath my feet!

when the light increased still further we noticed that the palms and
grasses of the island seemed withered and almost dead. the doctor
said that it must be on account of the cold that the island was now
suffering from in its new climate. these trees and grasses, he told us,
were the kind that belonged to warm, tropical weather.

the porpoises asked if we wanted them any further. and the doctor said
that he didnt think so, not for the presentnor the raft either, he
added; for it was already beginning to fall to pieces and could not
float much longer.

as we were preparing to go inland and explore the island, we suddenly
noticed a whole band of red indians watching us with great curiosity
from among the trees. the doctor went forward to talk to them. but
he could not make them understand. he tried by signs to show them
that he had come on a friendly visit. the indians didnt seem to like
us however. they had bows and arrows and long hunting spears, with
stone points, in their hands; and they made signs back to the doctor
to tell him that if he came a step nearer they would kill us all.
they evidently wanted us to leave the island at once. it was a very
uncomfortable situation.

at last the doctor made them understand that he only wanted to see the
island all over and that then he would go awaythough how he meant to
do it, with no boat to sail in, was more than i could imagine.

while they were talking among themselves another indian
arrivedapparently with a message that they were wanted in some
other part of the island. because presently, shaking their spears
threateningly at us, they went off with the newcomer.

what discourteous pagans! said bumpo. did you ever see such
inhospitability?never even asked us if wed had breakfast, the
benighted bounders!

sh! theyre going off to their village, said polynesia. ill bet
theres a village on the other side of those mountains. if you take my
advice, doctor, youll get away from this beach while their backs are
turned. let us go up into the higher land for the presentsome place
where they wont know where we are. they may grow friendlier when
they see we mean no harm. they have honest, open faces and look like
a decent crowd to me. theyre just ignorantprobably never saw white
folks before.

so, feeling a little bit discouraged by our first reception, we moved
off towards the mountains in the centre of the island.




_the sixth chapter_

the jabizri


we found the woods at the feet of the hills thick and tangly and
somewhat hard to get through. on polynesias advice, we kept away from
all paths and trails, feeling it best to avoid meeting any indians for
the present.

but she and chee-chee were good guides and splendid jungle-hunters; and
the two of them set to work at once looking for food for us. in a very
short space of time they had found quite a number of different fruits
and nuts which made excellent eating, though none of us knew the names
of any of them. we discovered a nice clean stream of good water which
came down from the mountains; so we were supplied with something to
drink as well.

we followed the stream up towards the heights. and presently we came to
parts where the woods were thinner and the ground rocky and steep. here
we could get glimpses of wonderful views all over the island, with the
blue sea beyond.

while we were admiring one of these the doctor suddenly said, sh!a
jabizri!dont you hear it?

we listened and heard, somewhere in the air about us, an
extraordinarily musical humlike a bee, but not just one note. this hum
rose and fell, up and downalmost like some one singing.

no other insect but the jabizri beetle hums like that, said the
doctor. i wonder where he isquite near, by the soundflying among the
trees probably. oh, if i only had my butterfly-net! why didnt i think
to strap that around my waist too. confound the storm: i may miss the
chance of a lifetime now of getting the rarest beetle in the worldoh
look! there he goes!

a huge beetle, easily three inches long i should say, suddenly flew by
our noses. the doctor got frightfully excited. he took off his hat to
use as a net, swooped at the beetle and caught it. he nearly fell down
a precipice on to the rocks below in his wild hurry, but that didnt
bother him in the least. he knelt down, chortling, upon the ground
with the jabizri safe under his hat. from his pocket he brought out a
glass-topped box, and into this he very skilfully made the beetle walk
from under the rim of the hat. then he rose up, happy as a child, to
examine his new treasure through the glass lid.

it certainly was a most beautiful insect. it was pale blue underneath;
but its back was glossy black with huge red spots on it.

there isnt an entymologist in the whole world who wouldnt give
all he has to be in my shoes to-day, said the doctorhulloa! this
jabizris got something on his legdoesnt look like mud. i wonder what
it is.

he took the beetle carefully out of the box and held it by its back
in his fingers, where it waved its six legs slowly in the air. we all
crowded about him peering at it. rolled around the middle section of
its right foreleg was something that looked like a thin dried leaf. it
was bound on very neatly with strong spider-web.

it was marvelous to see how john dolittle with his fat heavy fingers
undid that cobweb cord and unrolled the leaf, whole, without tearing it
or hurting the precious beetle. the jabizri he put back into the box.
then he spread the leaf out flat and examined it.

you can imagine our surprise when we found that the inside of the leaf
was covered with signs and pictures, drawn so tiny that you almost
needed a magnifying-glass to tell what they were. some of the signs we
couldnt make out at all; but nearly all of the pictures were quite
plain, figures of men and mountains mostly. the whole was done in a
curious sort of brown ink.

for several moments there was a dead silence while we all stared at
the leaf, fascinated and mystified.

i think this is written in blood, said the doctor at last. it
turns that color when its dry. somebody pricked his finger to make
these pictures. its an old dodge when youre short of inkbut highly
unsanitarywhat an extraordinary thing to find tied to a beetles leg!
i wish i could talk beetle language, and find out where the jabizri got
it from.

but what is it? i askedrows of little pictures and signs. what do
you make of it, doctor?

its a letter, he saida picture letter. all these little things put
together mean a messagebut why give a message to a beetle to carryand
to a jabizri, the rarest beetle in the world?what an extraordinary
thing!

then he fell to muttering over the pictures.

i wonder what it means: men walking up a mountain; men walking into
a hole in a mountain; a mountain falling downits a good drawing,
that; men pointing to their open mouths; barsprison-bars, perhaps; men
praying; men lying downthey look as though they might be sick; and
last of all, just a mountaina peculiar-shaped mountain.

all of a sudden the doctor looked up sharply at me, a wonderful smile
of delighted understanding spreading over his face.

_long arrow!_ he cried, dont you see, stubbins?why, of course!
only a naturalist would think of doing a thing like this: giving his
letter to a beetlenot to a common beetle, but to the rarest of all,
one that other naturalists would try to catchwell, well! long arrow!a
picture-letter from long arrow. for pictures are the only writing that
he knows.

yes, but who is the letter to? i asked.

its to me very likely. miranda had told him, i know, years ago, that
some day i meant to come here. but if not for me, then its for any one
who caught the beetle and read it. its a letter to the world.

well, but what does it say? it doesnt seem to me that its much good
to you now youve got it.

yes, it is, he said, because, look, i can read it now. first
picture: men walking up a mountainthats long arrow and his party;
men going into a hole in a mountainthey enter a cave looking for
medicine-plants or mosses; a mountain falling downsome hanging rocks
must have slipped and trapped them, imprisoned them in the cave. and
this was the only living creature that could carry a message for them
to the outside worlda beetle, who could _burrow_ his way into the open
air. of course it was only a slim chance that the beetle would be ever
caught and the letter read. but it _was_ a chance; and when men are in
great danger they grab at any straw of hope.... all right. now look at
the next picture: men pointing to their open mouthsthey are hungry;
men prayingbegging any one who finds this letter to come to their
assistance; men lying downthey are sick, or starving. this letter,
stubbins, is their last cry for help.

he sprang to his feet as he ended, snatched out a note-book and put
the letter between the leaves. his hands were trembling with haste and
agitation.

come on! he criedup the mountainall of you. theres not a moment
to lose. bumpo, bring the water and nuts with you. heaven only knows
how long theyve been pining underground. lets hope and pray were not
too late!

but where are you going to look? i asked. miranda said the island
was a hundred miles long and the mountains seem to run all the way down
the centre of it.

didnt you see the last picture? he said, grabbing up his hat from
the ground and cramming it on his head. it was an oddly shaped
mountainlooked like a hawks head. well, theres where he isif hes
still alive. first thing for us to do, is to get up on a high peak and
look around the island for a mountain shaped like a hawks headjust
to think of it! theres a chance of my meeting long arrow, the son of
golden arrow, after all!come on! hurry! to delay may mean death to the
greatest naturalist ever born!




_the seventh chapter_

hawks-head mountain


we all agreed afterwards that none of us had ever worked so hard in our
lives before as we did that day. for my part, i know i was often on the
point of dropping exhausted with fatigue; but i just kept on goinglike
a machinedetermined that, whatever happened, _i_ would not be the
first to give up.

when we had scrambled to the top of a high peak, almost instantly we
saw the strange mountain pictured in the letter. in shape it was the
perfect image of a hawks head, and was, as far as we could see, the
second highest summit in the island.

although we were all out of breath from our climb, the doctor didnt
let us rest a second as soon as he had sighted it. with one look at the
sun for direction, down he dashed again, breaking through thickets,
splashing over brooks, taking all the short cuts. for a fat man, he was
certainly the swiftest cross-country runner i ever saw.

we floundered after him as fast as we could. when i say _we_, i mean
bumpo and myself; for the animals, jip, chee-chee and polynesia, were
a long way aheadeven beyond the doctorenjoying the hunt like a
paper-chase.

at length we arrived at the foot of the mountain we were making for;
and we found its sides very steep. said the doctor,

now we will separate and search for caves. this spot where we now are,
will be our meeting-place. if anyone finds anything like a cave or a
hole where the earth and rocks have fallen in, he must shout and hulloa
to the rest of us. if we find nothing we will all gather here in about
an hours timeeverybody understand?

then we all went off our different ways.

each of us, you may be sure, was anxious to be the one to make a
discovery. and never was a mountain searched so thoroughly. but alas!
nothing could we find that looked in the least like a fallen-in cave.
there were plenty of places where rocks had tumbled down to the foot
of the slopes; but none of these appeared as though caves or passages
could possibly lie behind them.

one by one, tired and disappointed, we straggled back to the
meeting-place. the doctor seemed gloomy and impatient but by no means
inclined to give up.

jip, he said, couldnt you _smell_ anything like an indian anywhere?

no, said jip. i sniffed at every crack on the mountainside. but i am
afraid my nose will be of no use to you here, doctor. the trouble is,
the whole air is so saturated with the smell of spider-monkeys that it
drowns every other scentand besides, its too cold and dry for good
smelling.

it is certainly that, said the doctorand getting colder all the
time. im afraid the island is still drifting to the southward. lets
hope it stops before long, or we wont be able to get even nuts and
fruit to eateverything in the island will perishchee-chee, what luck
did you have?

none, doctor. i climbed to every peak and pinnacle i could see. i
searched every hollow and cleft. but not one place could i find where
men might be hidden.

and polynesia, asked the doctor, did you see nothing that might put
us on the right track?

not a thing, doctorbut i have a plan.

oh good! cried john dolittle, full of hope renewed. what is it?
lets hear it.

you still have that beetle with you, she askedthe biz-biz, or
whatever it is you call the wretched insect?

yes, said the doctor, producing the glass-topped box from his pocket,
here it is.

all right. now listen, said she. if what you have supposed is
truethat is, that long arrow had been trapped inside the mountain by
falling rock, he probably found that beetle inside the caveperhaps
many other different beetles too, eh? he wouldnt have been likely to
take the biz-biz in with him, would he?he was hunting plants, you say,
not beetles. isnt that right?

yes, said the doctor, thats probably so.

very well. it is fair to suppose then that the beetles home, or his
hole, is in that placethe part of the mountain where long arrow and
his party are imprisoned, isnt it?

quite, quite.

all right. then the thing to do is to let the beetle goand watch him;
and sooner or later hell return to his home in long arrows cave. and
there we will follow himor at all events, she added smoothing down
her wing-feathers with a very superior air, we will follow him till
the miserable bug starts nosing under the earth. but at least he will
show us what part of the mountain long arrow is hidden in.

but he may fly, if i let him out, said the doctor. then we shall
just lose him and be no better off than we were before.

_let_ him fly, snorted polynesia scornfully. a parrot can wing it as
fast as a biz-biz, i fancy. if he takes to the air, ill guarantee not
to let the little devil out of my sight. and if he just crawls along
the ground you can follow him yourself.

splendid! cried the doctor. polynesia, you have a great brain. ill
set him to work at once and see what happens.

again we all clustered round the doctor as he carefully lifted off the
glass lid and let the big beetle climb out upon his finger.

ladybug, ladybug, fly away home! crooned bumpo. your house is on
fire and your chil

oh, be quiet! snapped polynesia crossly. stop insulting him! dont
you suppose he has wits enough to go home without your telling him?

i thought perchance he might be of a philandering disposition, said
bumpo humbly. it could be that he is tired of his home and needs to be
encouraged. shall i sing him home sweet home, think you?

no. then hed never go back. your voice needs a rest. dont sing to
him: just watch himoh, and doctor, why not tie another message to the
creatures leg, telling long arrow that were doing our best to reach
him and that he mustnt give up hope?

i will, said the doctor. and in a minute he had pulled a dry leaf
from a bush near by and was covering it with little pictures in pencil.

at last, neatly fixed up with his new mail-bag, mr. jabizri crawled off
the doctors finger to the ground and looked about him. he stretched
his legs, polished his nose with his front feet and then moved off
leisurely to the westward.

we had expected him to walk _up_ the mountain; instead, he walked
_around_ it. do you know how long it takes a beetle to walk round a
mountain? well, i assure you it takes an unbelievably long time. as
the hours dragged by, we hoped and hoped that he would get up and fly
the rest, and let polynesia carry on the work of following him. but he
never opened his wings once. i had not realized before how hard it is
for a human being to walk slowly enough to keep up with a beetle. it
was the most tedious thing i have ever gone through. and as we dawdled
along behind, watching him like hawks lest we lose him under a leaf or
something, we all got so cross and ill-tempered we were ready to bite
one anothers heads off. and when he stopped to look at the scenery or
polish his nose some more, i could hear polynesia behind me letting out
the most dreadful seafaring swear-words you ever heard.

after he had led us the whole way round the mountain he brought us to
the exact spot where we started from and there he came to a dead stop.

well, said bumpo to polynesia, what do you think of the beetles
sense now? you see he _doesnt_ know enough to go home.

oh, be still, you hottentot! snapped polynesia. wouldnt _you_ want
to stretch your legs for exercise if youd been shut up in a box all
day. probably his home is near here, and thats why hes come back.

but why, i asked, did he go the whole way round the mountain first?

then the three of us got into a violent argument. but in the middle of
it all the doctor suddenly called out,

look, look!

we turned and found that he was pointing to the jabizri, who was now
walking _up_ the mountain at a much faster and more business-like gait.

well, said bumpo sitting down wearily; if he is going to walk _over_
the mountain and back, for more exercise, ill wait for him here.
chee-chee and polynesia can follow him.

indeed it would have taken a monkey or a bird to climb the place which
the beetle was now walking up. it was a smooth, flat part of the
mountains side, steep as a wall.

but presently, when the jabizri was no more than ten feet above our
heads, we all cried out together. for, even while we watched him, he
had disappeared into the face of the rock like a raindrop soaking into
sand.

hes gone, cried polynesia. there must be a hole up there. and in a
twinkling she had fluttered up the rock and was clinging to the face of
it with her claws.

yes, she shouted down, weve run him to earth at last. his hole is
right here, behind a patch of lichenbig enough to get two fingers in.

ah, cried the doctor, this great slab of rock then must have slid
down from the summit and shut off the mouth of the cave like a door.
poor fellows! what a dreadful time they must have spent in there!oh,
if we only had some picks and shovels now!

picks and shovels wouldnt do much good, said polynesia. look at the
size of the slab: a hundred feet high and as many broad. you would need
an army for a week to make any impression on it.

i wonder how thick it is, said the doctor; and he picked up a big
stone and banged it with all his might against the face of the rock.
it made a hollow booming sound, like a giant drum. we all stood still
listening while the echo of it died slowly away.

and then a cold shiver ran down my spine. for, from within the
mountain, back came three answering knocks: _boom!... boom!... boom!_

wide-eyed we looked at one another as though the earth itself had
spoken. and the solemn little silence that followed was broken by the
doctor.

thank heaven, he said in a hushed reverent voice, some of them at
least are alive!




part five




_the first chapter_

a great moment


the next part of our problem was the hardest of all: how to roll aside,
pull down or break open, that gigantic slab. as we gazed up at it
towering above our heads, it looked indeed a hopeless task for our tiny
strength.

but the sounds of life from inside the mountain had put new heart in
us. and in a moment we were all scrambling around trying to find any
opening or crevice which would give us something to work on. chee-chee
scaled up the sheer wall of the slab and examined the top of it where
it leaned against the mountains side; i uprooted bushes and stripped
off hanging creepers that might conceal a weak place; the doctor got
more leaves and composed new picture-letters for the jabizri to take
in if he should turn up again; whilst polynesia carried up a handful
of nuts and pushed them into the beetles hole, one by one, for the
prisoners inside to eat.

nuts are so nourishing, she said.

but jip it was who, scratching at the foot of the slab like a good
ratter, made the discovery which led to our final success.

doctor, he cried, running up to john dolittle with his nose all
covered with black mud, this slab is resting on nothing but a bed of
soft earth. you never saw such easy digging. i guess the cave behind
must be just too high up for the indians to reach the earth with their
hands, or they could have scraped a way out long ago. if we can only
scratch the earth-bed away from under, the slab might drop a little.
then maybe the indians can climb out over the top.

the doctor hurried to examine the place where jip had dug.

why, yes, he said, if we can get the earth away from under this
front edge, the slab is standing up so straight, we might even make it
fall right down in this direction. its well worth trying. lets get at
it, quick.

we had no tools but the sticks and slivers of stone which we could
find around. a strange sight we must have looked, the whole crew of us
squatting down on our heels, scratching and burrowing at the foot of
the mountain, like six badgers in a row.

after about an hour, during which in spite of the cold the sweat fell
from our foreheads in all directions, the doctor said,

be ready to jump from under, clear out of the way, if she shows signs
of moving. if this slab falls on anybody, it will squash him flatter
than a pancake.

presently there was a grating, grinding sound.

look out! yelled john dolittle, here she comes!scatter!

we ran for our lives, outwards, toward the sides. the big rock slid
gently down, about a foot, into the trough which we had made beneath
it. for a moment i was disappointed, for like that, it was as hopeless
as beforeno signs of a cave-mouth showing above it. but as i looked
upward, i saw the top coming very slowly away from the mountainside.
we had unbalanced it below. as it moved apart from the face of the
mountain, sounds of human voices, crying gladly in a strange tongue,
issued from behind. faster and faster the top swung forward, downward.
then, with a roaring crash which shook the whole mountain-range beneath
our feet, it struck the earth and cracked in halves.

how can i describe to any one that first meeting between the two
greatest naturalists the world ever knew, long arrow, the son of golden
arrow and john dolittle, m.d., of puddleby-on-the-marsh? the scene
rises before me now, plain and clear in every detail, though it took
place so many, many years ago. but when i come to write of it, words
seem such poor things with which to tell you of that great occasion.

i know that the doctor, whose life was surely full enough of big
happenings, always counted the setting free of the indian scientist
as the greatest thing he ever did. for my part, knowing how much this
meeting must mean to him, i was on pins and needles of expectation and
curiosity as the great stone finally thundered down at our feet and we
gazed across it to see what lay behind.

the gloomy black mouth of a tunnel, full twenty feet high, was
revealed. in the centre of this opening stood an enormous red indian,
seven feet tall, handsome, muscular, slim and nakedbut for a beaded
cloth about his middle and an eagles feather in his hair. he held one
hand across his face to shield his eyes from the blinding sun which he
had not seen in many days.

it is he! i heard the doctor whisper at my elbow. i know him by his
great height and the scar upon his chin.

and he stepped forward slowly across the fallen stone with his hand
outstretched to the red man.

presently the indian uncovered his eyes. and i saw that they had a
curious piercing gleam in themlike the eyes of an eagle, but kinder
and more gentle. he slowly raised his right arm, the rest of him still
and motionless like a statue, and took the doctors hand in his. it was
a great moment. polynesia nodded to me in a knowing, satisfied kind of
way. and i heard old bumpo sniffle sentimentally.

then the doctor tried to speak to long arrow. but the indian knew
no english of course, and the doctor knew no indian. presently, to my
surprise, i heard the doctor trying him in different animal languages.

[illustration: it was a great moment]

how do you do? he said in dog-talk; i am glad to see you, in
horse-signs; how long have you been buried? in deer-language.
still the indian made no move but stood there, straight and stiff,
understanding not a word.

the doctor tried again, in several other animal dialects. but with no
result.

till at last he came to the language of eagles.

great red-skin, he said in the fierce screams and short grunts that
the big birds use, never have i been so glad in all my life as i am
to-day to find you still alive.

in a flash long arrows stony face lit up with a smile of
understanding; and back came the answer in eagle-tongue,

mighty white man, i owe my life to you. for the remainder of my days i
am your servant to command.

afterwards long arrow told us that this was the only bird or animal
language that he had ever been able to learn. but that he had not
spoken it in a long time, for no eagles ever came to this island.

then the doctor signaled to bumpo who came forward with the nuts and
water. but long arrow neither ate nor drank. taking the supplies with
a nod of thanks, he turned and carried them into the inner dimness of
the cave. we followed him.

inside we found nine other indians, men, women and boys, lying on the
rock floor in a dreadful state of thinness and exhaustion.

some had their eyes closed, as if dead. quickly the doctor went round
them all and listened to their hearts. they were all alive; but one
woman was too weak even to stand upon her feet.

at a word from the doctor, chee-chee and polynesia sped off into the
jungles after more fruit and water.

while long arrow was handing round what food we had to his starving
friends, we suddenly heard a sound outside the cave. turning about we
saw, clustered at the entrance, the band of indians who had met us so
inhospitably at the beach.

they peered into the dark cave cautiously at first. but as soon as
they saw long arrow and the other indians with us, they came rushing
in, laughing, clapping their hands with joy and jabbering away at a
tremendous rate.

long arrow explained to the doctor that the nine indians we had found
in the cave with him were two families who had accompanied him into
the mountains to help him gather medicine-plants. and while they had
been searching for a kind of mossgood for indigestionwhich grows only
inside of damp caves, the great rock slab had slid down and shut them
in. then for two weeks they had lived on the medicine-moss and such
fresh water as could be found dripping from the damp walls of the cave.
the other indians on the island had given them up for lost and mourned
them as dead; and they were now very surprised and happy to find their
relatives alive.

when long arrow turned to the newcomers and told them in their own
language that it was the white man who had found and freed their
relatives, they gathered round john dolittle, all talking at once and
beating their breasts.

long arrow said they were apologizing and trying to tell the doctor how
sorry they were that they had seemed unfriendly to him at the beach.
they had never seen a white man before and had really been afraid of
himespecially when they saw him conversing with the porpoises. they
had thought he was the devil, they said.

then they went outside and looked at the great stone we had thrown
down, big as a meadow; and they walked round and round it, pointing to
the break running through the middle and wondering how the trick of
felling it was done.

travelers who have since visited spidermonkey island tell me that
that huge stone slab is now one of the regular sights of the island.
and that the indian guides, when showing it to visitors, always tell
_their_ story of how it came there. they say that when the doctor
found that the rocks had entrapped his friend, long arrow, he was so
angry that he ripped the mountain in halves with his bare hands and let
him out.




_the second chapter_

the men of the moving land


from that time on the indians treatment of us was very different. we
were invited to their village for a feast to celebrate the recovery
of the lost families. and after we had made a litter from saplings to
carry the sick woman in, we all started off down the mountain.

on the way the indians told long arrow something which appeared to
be sad news, for on hearing it, his face grew very grave. the doctor
asked him what was wrong. and long arrow said he had just been informed
that the chief of the tribe, an old man of eighty, had died early that
morning.

that, polynesia whispered in my ear, must have been what they went
back to the village for, when the messenger fetched them from the
beach.remember?

what did he die of? asked the doctor.

he died of cold, said long arrow.

indeed, now that the sun was setting, we were all shivering ourselves.

this is a serious thing, said the doctor to me. the island is still
in the grip of that wretched current flowing southward. we will have to
look into this to-morrow. if nothing can be done about it, the indians
had better take to canoes and leave the island. the chance of being
wrecked will be better than getting frozen to death in the ice-floes of
the antarctic.

presently we came over a saddle in the hills, and looking downward on
the far side of the island, we saw the villagea large cluster of grass
huts and gaily colored totem-poles close by the edge of the sea.

how artistic! said the doctordelightfully situated. what is the
name of the village?

popsipetel, said long arrow. that is the name also of the tribe. the
word signifies in indian tongue, _the men of the moving land_. there
are two tribes of indians on the island: the popsipetels at this end
and the bag-jagderags at the other.

which is the larger of the two peoples?

the bag-jagderags, by far. their city covers two square leagues. but,
added long arrow a slight frown darkening his handsome face, for me, i
would rather have one popsipetel than a hundred bag-jagderags.

the news of the rescue we had made had evidently gone ahead of us. for
as we drew nearer to the village we saw crowds of indians streaming out
to greet the friends and relatives whom they had never thought to see
again.

these good people, when they too were told how the rescue had been the
work of the strange white visitor to their shores, all gathered round
the doctor, shook him by the hands, patted him and hugged him. then
they lifted him up upon their strong shoulders and carried him down the
hill into the village.

there the welcome we received was even more wonderful. in spite of
the cold air of the coming night, the villagers, who had all been
shivering within their houses, threw open their doors and came out in
hundreds. i had no idea that the little village could hold so many.
they thronged about us, smiling and nodding and waving their hands;
and as the details of what we had done were recited by long arrow they
kept shouting strange singing noises, which we supposed were words of
gratitude or praise.

we were next escorted to a brand-new grass house, clean and
sweet-smelling within, and informed that it was ours. six strong indian
boys were told off to be our servants.

on our way through the village we noticed a house, larger than the
rest, standing at the end of the main street. long arrow pointed to it
and told us it was the chiefs house, but that it was now emptyno new
chief having yet been elected to take the place of the old one who had
died.

inside our new home a feast of fish and fruit had been prepared. most
of the more important men of the tribe were already seating themselves
at the long dining-table when we got there. long arrow invited us to
sit down and eat.

this we were glad enough to do, as we were all hungry. but we were both
surprised and disappointed when we found that the fish had not been
cooked. the indians did not seem to think this extraordinary in the
least, but went ahead gobbling the fish with much relish the way it
was, raw.

with many apologies, the doctor explained to long arrow that if they
had no objection we would prefer our fish cooked.

imagine our astonishment when we found that the great long arrow, so
learned in the natural sciences, did not know what the word _cooked_
meant!

polynesia who was sitting on the bench between john dolittle and myself
pulled the doctor by the sleeve.

ill tell you whats wrong, doctor, she whispered as he leant down to
listen to her: _these people have no fires_! they dont know how to
make a fire. look outside: its almost dark, and there isnt a light
showing in the whole village. this is a fireless people.




_the third chapter_

fire


then the doctor asked long arrow if he knew what fire was, explaining
it to him by pictures drawn on the buckskin table-cloth. long arrow
said he had seen such a thingcoming out of the tops of volcanoes; but
that neither he nor any of the popsipetels knew how it was made.

poor perishing heathens! muttered bumpo. no wonder the old chief
died of cold!

at that moment we heard a crying sound at the door. and turning round,
we saw a weeping indian mother with a baby in her arms. she said
something to the indians which we could not understand; and long arrow
told us the baby was sick and she wanted the white doctor to try and
cure it.

oh lord! groaned polynesia in my earjust like puddleby: patients
arriving in the middle of dinner. well, one thing: the foods raw, so
nothing can get cold anyway.

the doctor examined the baby and found at once that it was thoroughly
chilled.

fire_fire_! thats what it needs, he said turning to long
arrowthats what you all need. this child will have pneumonia if it
isnt kept warm.

aye, truly. but how to make a fire, said long arrowwhere to get it:
that is the difficulty. all the volcanoes in this land are dead.

then we fell to hunting through our pockets to see if any matches had
survived the shipwreck. the best we could muster were two whole ones
and a halfall with the heads soaked off them by salt water.

hark, long arrow, said the doctor: divers ways there be of making
fire without the aid of matches. one: with a strong glass and the
rays of the sun. that however, since the sun has set, we cannot now
employ. another is by grinding a hard stick into a soft logis the
daylight gone without?alas yes. then i fear we must await the morrow;
for besides the different woods, we need an old squirrels nest for
fueland that without lamps you could not find in your forests at this
hour.

great are your cunning and your skill, oh white man, long arrow
replied. but in this you do us an injustice. know you not that all
fireless peoples can see in the dark? having no lamps we are forced to
train ourselves to travel through the blackest night, lightless. i will
despatch a messenger and you shall have your squirrels nest within the
hour.

he gave an order to two of our boy-servants who promptly disappeared
running. and sure enough, in a very short space of time a squirrels
nest, together with hard and soft woods, was brought to our door.

the moon had not yet risen and within the house it was practically
pitch-black. i could feel and hear, however, that the indians were
moving about comfortably as though it were daylight. the task of making
fire the doctor had to perform almost entirely by the sense of touch,
asking long arrow and the indians to hand him his tools when he mislaid
them in the dark. and then i made a curious discovery: now that i had
to, i found that i was beginning to see a little in the dark myself.
and for the first time i realized that of course there _is_ no such
thing as pitch-dark, so long as you have a door open or a sky above you.

calling for the loan of a bow, the doctor loosened the string, put the
hard stick into a loop and began grinding this stick into the soft wood
of the log. soon i smelt that the log was smoking. then he kept feeding
the part that was smoking with the inside lining of the squirrels
nest, and he asked me to blow upon it with my breath. he made the stick
drill faster and faster. more smoke filled the room. and at last the
darkness about us was suddenly lit up. the squirrels nest had burst
into flame.

the indians murmured and grunted with astonishment. at first they were
all for falling on their knees and worshiping the fire. then they
wanted to pick it up with their bare hands and play with it. we had to
teach them how it was to be used; and they were quite fascinated when
we laid our fish across it on sticks and cooked it. they sniffed the
air with relish as, for the first time in history, the smell of fried
fish passed through the village of popsipetel.

then we got them to bring us piles and stacks of dry wood; and we made
an enormous bonfire in the middle of the main street. round this, when
they felt its warmth, the whole tribe gathered and smiled and wondered.
it was a striking sight, one of the pictures from our voyages that i
most frequently remember: that roaring jolly blaze beneath the black
night sky, and all about it a vast ring of indians, the firelight
gleaming on bronze cheeks, white teeth and flashing eyesa whole town
trying to get warm, giggling and pushing like school-children.

in a little, when we had got them more used to the handling of fire,
the doctor showed them how it could be taken into their houses if a
hole were only made in the roof to let the smoke out. and before we
turned in after that long, long, tiring day, we had fires going in
every hut in the village.

the poor people were so glad to get really warm again that we thought
theyd never go to bed. well on into the early hours of the morning
the little town fairly buzzed with a great low murmur: the popsipetels
sitting up talking of their wonderful pale-faced visitor and this
strange good thing he had brought with him_fire_!




_the fourth chapter_

what makes an island float


very early in our experience of popsipetel kindness we saw that if we
were to get anything done at all, we would almost always have to do it
secretly. the doctor was so popular and loved by all that as soon as he
showed his face at his door in the morning crowds of admirers, waiting
patiently outside, flocked about him and followed him wherever he went.
after his fire-making feat, this childlike people expected him, i
think, to be continually doing magic; and they were determined not to
miss a trick.

it was only with great difficulty that we escaped from the crowd the
first morning and set out with long arrow to explore the island at our
leisure.

in the interior we found that not only the plants and trees were
suffering from the cold: the animal life was in even worse straits.
everywhere shivering birds were to be seen, their feathers all fluffed
out, gathering together for flight to summer lands. and many lay dead
upon the ground. going down to the shore, we watched land-crabs in
large numbers taking to the sea to find some better home. while away to
the southeast we could see many icebergs floatinga sign that we were
now not far from the terrible region of the antarctic.

as we were looking out to sea, we noticed our friends the porpoises
jumping through the waves. the doctor hailed them and they came inshore.

he asked them how far we were from the south polar continent.

about a hundred miles, they told him. and then they asked why he wanted
to know.

because this floating island we are on, said he, is drifting
southward all the time in a current. its an island that ordinarily
belongs somewhere in the tropic zonereal sultry weather, sunstrokes
and all that. if it doesnt stop going southward pretty soon everything
on it is going to perish.

well, said the porpoises, then the thing to do is to get it back
into a warmer climate, isnt it?

yes, but how? said the doctor. we cant _row_ it back.

no, said they, but whales could push itif you only got enough of
them.

what a splendid idea!whales, the very thing! said the doctor. do
you think you could get me some?

why, certainly, said the porpoises, we passed one herd of them out
there, sporting about among the icebergs. well ask them to come over.
and if they arent enough, well try and hunt up some more. better have
plenty.

thank you, said the doctor. you are very kindby the way, do you
happen to know how this island came to be a floating island? at least
half of it, i notice, is made of stone. it is very odd that it floats
at all, isnt it?

it is unusual, they said. but the explanation is quite simple. it
used to be a mountainous part of south americaan overhanging partsort
of an awkward corner, you might say. way back in the glacial days,
thousands of years ago, it broke off from the mainland; and by some
curious accident the inside of it, which is hollow, got filled with
air as it fell into the ocean. you can only see less than half of
the island: the bigger half is under water. and in the middle of it,
underneath, is a huge rock air-chamber, running right up inside the
mountains. and thats what keeps it floating.

what a pecurious phenometer! said bumpo.

it is indeed, said the doctor. i must make a note of that. and out
came the everlasting note-book.

the porpoises went bounding off towards the icebergs. and not long
after, we saw the sea heaving and frothing as a big herd of whales came
towards us at full speed.

they certainly were enormous creatures; and there must have been a good
two hundred of them.

here they are, said the porpoises, poking their heads out of the
water.

good! said the doctor. now just explain to them, will you please?
that this is a very serious matter for all the living creatures in this
land. and ask them if they will be so good as to go down to the far end
of the island, put their noses against it and push it back near the
coast of southern brazil.

the porpoises evidently succeeded in persuading the whales to do as the
doctor asked; for presently we saw them thrashing through the seas,
going off towards the south end of the island.

then we lay down upon the beach and waited.

after about an hour the doctor got up and threw a stick into the water.
for a while this floated motionless. but soon we saw it begin to move
gently down the coast.

ah! said the doctor, see that?the island is going north at last.
thank goodness!

faster and faster we left the stick behind; and smaller and dimmer grew
the icebergs on the skyline.

the doctor took out his watch, threw more sticks into the water and
made a rapid calculation.

humph!fourteen and a half knots an hour, he murmureda very nice
speed. it should take us about five days to get back near brazil. well,
thats thatquite a load off my mind. i declare i feel warmer already.
lets go and get something to eat.




_the fifth chapter_

war!


on our way back to the village the doctor began discussing natural
history with long arrow. but their most interesting talk, mainly about
plants, had hardly begun when an indian runner came dashing up to us
with a message.

long arrow listened gravely to the breathless, babbled words, then
turned to the doctor and said in eagle tongue,

great white man, an evil thing has befallen the popsipetels. our
neighbors to the southward, the thievish bag-jagderags, who for so long
have cast envious eyes on our stores of ripe corn, have gone upon the
war-path; and even now are advancing to attack us.

evil news indeed, said the doctor. yet let us not judge harshly.
perhaps it is that they are desperate for food, having their own crops
frost-killed before harvest. for are they not even nearer the cold
south than you?

make no excuses for any man of the tribe of the bag-jagderags, said
long arrow shaking his head. they are an idle shiftless race. they do
but see a chance to get corn without the labor of husbandry. if it
were not that they are a much bigger tribe and hope to defeat their
neighbor by sheer force of numbers, they would not have dared to make
open war upon the brave popsipetels.

when we reached the village we found it in a great state of excitement.
everywhere men were seen putting their bows in order, sharpening
spears, grinding battle-axes and making arrows by the hundred. women
were raising a high fence of bamboo poles all round the village. scouts
and messengers kept coming and going, bringing news of the movements of
the enemy. while high up in the trees and hills about the village we
could see look-outs watching the mountains to the southward.

long arrow brought another indian, short but enormously broad, and
introduced him to the doctor as big teeth, the chief warrior of the
popsipetels.

the doctor volunteered to go and see the enemy and try to argue the
matter out peacefully with them instead of fighting; for war, he said,
was at best a stupid wasteful business. but the two shook their heads.
such a plan was hopeless, they said. in the last war when they had sent
a messenger to do peaceful arguing, the enemy had merely hit him with
an ax.

while the doctor was asking big teeth how he meant to defend the
village against attack, a cry of alarm was raised by the look-outs.

theyre coming!the bag-jagderagsswarming down the mountains in
thousands!

well, said the doctor, its all in the days work, i suppose. i
dont believe in war; but if the village is attacked we must help
defend it.

and he picked up a club from the ground and tried the heft of it
against a stone.

this, he said, seems like a pretty good tool to me. and he walked
to the bamboo fence and took his place among the other waiting fighters.

then we all got hold of some kind of weapon with which to help our
friends, the gallant popsipetels: i borrowed a bow and a quiver full of
arrows; jip was content to rely upon his old, but still strong teeth;
chee-chee took a bag of rocks and climbed a palm where he could throw
them down upon the enemies heads; and bumpo marched after the doctor
to the fence armed with a young tree in one hand and a door-post in the
other.

when the enemy drew near enough to be seen from where we stood we all
gasped with astonishment. the hillsides were actually covered with
themthousands upon thousands. they made our small army within the
village look like a mere handful.

saints alive! muttered polynesia, our little lot will stand no
chance against that swarm. this will never do. im going off to get
some help.

where she was going and what kind of help she meant to get, i had no
idea. she just disappeared from my side. but jip, who had heard her,
poked his nose between the bamboo bars of the fence to get a better
view of the enemy and said,

likely enough shes gone after the black parrots. lets hope she
finds them in time. just look at those ugly ruffians climbing down the
rocksmillions of em! this fights going to keep us all hopping.

and jip was right. before a quarter of an hour had gone by our
village was completely surrounded by one huge mob of yelling, raging
bag-jagderags.

i now come again to a part in the story of our voyages where things
happened so quickly, one upon the other, that looking backwards i see
the picture only in a confused kind of way. i know that if it had not
been for the terrible threeas they came afterwards to be fondly called
in popsipetel historylong arrow, bumpo and the doctor, the war would
have been soon over and the whole island would have belonged to the
worthless bag-jagderags. but the englishman, the african and the indian
were a regiment in themselves; and between them they made that village
a dangerous place for any man to try to enter.

the bamboo fencing which had been hastily set up around the town was
not a very strong affair; and right from the start it gave way in
one place after another as the enemy thronged and crowded against it.
then the doctor, long arrow and bumpo would hurry to the weak spot, a
terrific hand-to-hand fight would take place and the enemy be thrown
out. but almost instantly a cry of alarm would come from some other
part of the village-wall; and the three would have to rush off and do
the same thing all over again.

[illustration: the terrible three

_from an indian rock-engraving found on hawks-head mountain,
spidermonkey island_]

the popsipetels were themselves no mean fighters; but the strength and
weight of those three men of different lands and colors, standing close
together, swinging their enormous war-clubs, was really a sight for the
wonder and admiration of any one.

many weeks later when i was passing an indian camp-fire at night i
heard this song being sung. it has since become one of the traditional
folksongs of the popsipetels.

             the song of the terrible three

      oh hear ye the song of the terrible three
    and the fight that they fought by the edge of the sea.
      down from the mountains, the rocks and the crags,
    swarming like wasps, came the bag-jagderags.

      surrounding our village, our walls they broke down.
    oh, sad was the plight of our men and our town!
      but heaven determined our land to set free
    and sent us the help of the terrible three.

      one was a blackhe was dark as the night;
    one was a red-skin, a mountain of height;
      but the chief was a white man, round like a bee;
    and all in a row stood the terrible three.

      shoulder to shoulder, they hammered and hit.
    like demons of fury they kicked and they bit.
      like a wall of destruction they stood in a row,
    flattening enemies, six at a blow.

      oh, strong was the red-skin fierce was the black.
    bag-jagderags trembled and tried to turn back.
      but twas of the white man they shouted, beware!
    he throws men in handfuls, straight up in the air!

      long shall they frighten bad children at night
    with tales of the red and the black and the white.
      and long shall we sing of the terrible three
    and the fight that they fought by the edge of the sea.




_the sixth chapter_

general polynesia


but alas! even the three, mighty though they were, could not last
forever against an army which seemed to have no end. in one of the
hottest scrimmages, when the enemy had broken a particularly wide hole
through the fence, i saw long arrows great figure topple and come down
with a spear sticking in his broad chest.

for another half-hour bumpo and the doctor fought on side by side. how
their strength held out so long i cannot tell, for never a second were
they given to get their breath or rest their arms.

the doctorthe quiet, kindly, peaceable, little doctor!well, you
wouldnt have known him if you had seen him that day dealing out whacks
you could hear a mile off, walloping and swatting in all directions.

as for bumpo, with staring eye-balls and grim set teeth, he was
a veritable demon. none dared come within yards of that wicked,
wide-circling door-post. but a stone, skilfully thrown, struck him at
last in the centre of the forehead. and down went the second of the
three. john dolittle, the last of the terribles, was left fighting
alone.

jip and i rushed to his side and tried to take the places of the fallen
ones. but, far too light and too small, we made but a poor exchange.
another length of the fence crashed down, and through the widened gap
the bag-jagderags poured in on us like a flood.

to the canoes!to the sea! shouted the popsipetels. fly for your
lives!all is over!the war is lost!

but the doctor and i never got a chance to fly for our lives. we were
swept off our feet and knocked down flat by the sheer weight of the
mob. and once down, we were unable to get up again. i thought we would
surely be trampled to death.

but at that moment, above the din and racket of the battle, we heard
the most terrifying noise that ever assaulted human ears: the sound of
millions and millions of parrots all screeching with fury together.

the army, which in the nick of time polynesia had brought to our
rescue, darkened the whole sky to the westward. i asked her afterwards,
how many birds there were; and she said she didnt know exactly but
that they certainly numbered somewhere between sixty and seventy
millions. in that extraordinarily short space of time she had brought
them from the mainland of south america.

if you have ever heard a parrot screech with anger you will know that
it makes a truly frightful sound; and if you have ever been bitten by
one, you will know that its bite can be a nasty and a painful thing.

the black parrots (coal-black all over, they wereexcept for a scarlet
beak and a streak of red in wing and tail) on the word of command from
polynesia set to work upon the bag-jagderags who were now pouring
through the village looking for plunder.

and the black parrots method of fighting was peculiar. this is what
they did: on the head of each bag-jagderag three or four parrots
settled and took a good foot-hold in his hair with their claws; then
they leant down over the sides of his head and began clipping snips out
of his ears, for all the world as though they were punching tickets.
that is all they did. they never bit them anywhere else except the
ears. but it won the war for us.

with howls pitiful to hear, the bag-jagderags fell over one another in
their haste to get out of that accursed village. it was no use their
trying to pull the parrots off their heads; because for each head there
were always four more parrots waiting impatiently to get on.

some of the enemy were lucky; and with only a snip or two managed to
get outside the fencewhere the parrots immediately left them alone.
but with most, before the black birds had done with them, the ears
presented a very singular appearancelike the edge of a postage-stamp.
this treatment, very painful at the time, did not however do them any
permanent harm beyond the change in looks. and it later got to be the
tribal mark of the bag-jagderags. no really smart young lady of this
tribe would be seen walking with a man who did not have scalloped
earsfor such was a proof that he had been in the great war. and that
(though it is not generally known to scientists) is how this people
came to be called by the other indian nations, the _ragged-eared
bag-jagderags_.

as soon as the village was cleared of the enemy the doctor turned his
attention to the wounded.

in spite of the length and fierceness of the struggle, there were
surprisingly few serious injuries. poor long arrow was the worst off.
however, after the doctor had washed his wound and got him to bed, he
opened his eyes and said he already felt better. bumpo was only badly
stunned.

with this part of the business over, the doctor called to polynesia
to have the black parrots drive the enemy right back into their own
country and to wait there, guarding them all night.

polynesia gave the short word of command; and like one bird those
millions of parrots opened their red beaks and let out once more their
terrifying battle-scream.

the bag-jagderags didnt wait to be bitten a second time, but fled
helter-skelter over the mountains from which they had come; whilst
polynesia and her victorious army followed watchfully behind like a
great, threatening, black cloud.

the doctor picked up his high hat which had been knocked off in the
fight, dusted it carefully and put it on.

to-morrow, he said, shaking his fist towards the hills, we will
arrange the terms of peaceand we will arrange themin the city of
bag-jagderag!

his words were greeted with cheers of triumph from the admiring
popsipetels. the war was over.




_the seventh chapter_

the peace of the parrots


the next day we set out for the far end of the island, and reaching it
in canoes (for we went by sea) after a journey of twenty-five hours, we
remained no longer than was necessary in the city of bag-jagderag.

when he threw himself into that fight at popsipetel, i saw the doctor
really angry for the first time in my life. but his anger, once
aroused, was slow to die. all the way down the coast of the island he
never ceased to rail against this cowardly people who had attacked his
friends, the popsipetels, for no other reason but to rob them of their
corn, because they were too idle to till the land themselves. and he
was still angry when he reached the city of bag-jagderag.

long arrow had not come with us for he was as yet too weak from his
wound. but the doctoralways clever at languageswas already getting
familiar with the indian tongue. besides, among the half-dozen
popsipetels who accompanied us to paddle the canoes, was one boy to
whom we had taught a little english. he and the doctor between them
managed to make themselves understood to the bag-jagderags. this
people, with the terrible parrots still blackening the hills about
their stone town, waiting for the word to descend and attack, were, we
found, in a very humble mood.

leaving our canoes we passed up the main street to the palace of the
chief. bumpo and i couldnt help smiling with satisfaction as we saw
how the waiting crowds which lined the roadway bowed their heads to the
ground, as the little, round, angry figure of the doctor strutted ahead
of us with his chin in the air.

at the foot of the palace-steps the chief and all the more important
personages of the tribe were waiting to meet him, smiling humbly and
holding out their hands in friendliness. the doctor took not the
slightest notice. he marched right by them, up the steps to the door
of the palace. there he turned around and at once began to address the
people in a firm voice.

i never heard such a speech in my lifeand i am quite sure that they
never did either. first he called them a long string of names: cowards,
loafers, thieves, vagabonds, good-for-nothings, bullies and what not.
then he said he was still seriously thinking of allowing the parrots to
drive them on into the sea, in order that this pleasant land might be
rid, once for all, of their worthless carcases.

at this a great cry for mercy went up, and the chief and all of
them fell on their knees, calling out that they would submit to any
conditions of peace he wished.

then the doctor called for one of their scribesthat is, a man who did
picture-writing. and on the stone walls of the palace of bag-jagderag
he bade him write down the terms of the peace as he dictated it.
this peace is known as _the peace of the parrots_, andunlike most
peaceswas, and is, strictly kepteven to this day.

it was quite long in words. the half of the palace-front was covered
with picture-writing, and fifty pots of paint were used, before the
weary scribe had done. but the main part of it all was that there
should be no more fighting; and that the two tribes should give solemn
promise to help one another whenever there was corn-famine or other
distress in the lands belonging to either.

this greatly surprised the bag-jagderags. they had expected from the
doctors angry face that he would at least chop a couple of hundred
heads offand probably make the rest of them slaves for life.

but when they saw that he only meant kindly by them, their great fear
of him changed to a tremendous admiration. and as he ended his long
speech and walked briskly down the steps again on his way back to the
canoes, the group of chieftains threw themselves at his feet and cried,

do but stay with us, great lord, and all the riches of bag-jagderag
shall be poured into your lap. gold-mines we know of in the mountains
and pearl-beds beneath the sea. only stay with us, that your
all-powerful wisdom may lead our council and our people in prosperity
and peace.

the doctor held up his hand for silence.

no man, said he, would wish to be the guest of the bag-jagderags
till they had proved by their deeds that they are an honest race. be
true to the terms of the peace and from yourselves shall come good
government and prosperityfarewell!

then he turned and followed by bumpo, the popsipetels and myself,
walked rapidly down to the canoes.




_the eighth chapter_

the hanging stone


but the change of heart in the bag-jagderags was really sincere. the
doctor had made a great impression on thema deeper one than even he
himself realized at the time. in fact i sometimes think that that
speech of his from the palace-steps had more effect upon the indians of
spidermonkey island than had any of his great deeds which, great though
they were, were always magnified and exaggerated when the news of them
was passed from mouth to mouth.

a sick girl was brought to him as he reached the place where the boats
lay. she turned out to have some quite simple ailment which he quickly
gave the remedy for. but this increased his popularity still more. and
when he stepped into his canoe, the people all around us actually burst
into tears. it seems (i learned this afterwards) that they thought he
was going away across the sea, for good, to the mysterious foreign
lands from which he had come.

some of the chieftains spoke to the popsipetels as we pushed off. what
they said i did not understand; but we noticed that several canoes
filled with bag-jagderags followed us at a respectful distance all the
way back to popsipetel.

the doctor had determined to return by the other shore, so that we
should be thus able to make a complete trip round the islands shores.

shortly after we started, while still off the lower end of the island,
we sighted a steep point on the coast where the sea was in a great
state of turmoil, white with soapy froth. on going nearer, we found
that this was caused by our friendly whales who were still faithfully
working away with their noses against the end of the island, driving us
northward. we had been kept so busy with the war that we had forgotten
all about them. but as we paused and watched their mighty tails lashing
and churning the sea, we suddenly realized that we had not felt cold
in quite a long while. speeding up our boat lest the island be carried
away from us altogether, we passed on up the coast; and here and there
we noticed that the trees on the shore already looked greener and more
healthy. spidermonkey island was getting back into her home climates.

about halfway to popsipetel we went ashore and spent two or three days
exploring the central part of the island. our indian paddlers took us
up into the mountains, very steep and high in this region, overhanging
the sea. and they showed us what they called the whispering rocks.

this was a very peculiar and striking piece of scenery. it was like a
great vast basin, or circus, in the mountains, and out of the centre of
it there rose a table of rock with an ivory chair upon it. all around
this the mountains went up like stairs, or theatre-seats, to a great
heightexcept at one narrow end which was open to a view of the sea.
you could imagine it a council-place or concert-hall for giants, and
the rock table in the centre the stage for performers or the stand for
the speaker.

[illustration: working away with their noses against the end of the
island]

we asked our guides why it was called the whispering rocks; and they
said, go down into it and we will show you.

the great bowl was miles deep and miles wide. we scrambled down the
rocks and they showed us how, even when you stood far, far apart from
one another, you merely had to whisper in that great place and every
one in the theatre could hear you. this was, the doctor said, on
account of the echoes which played backwards and forwards between the
high walls of rock.

our guides told us that it was here, in days long gone by when the
popsipetels owned the whole of spidermonkey island, that the kings
were crowned. the ivory chair upon the table was the throne in which
they sat. and so great was the big theatre that all the indians in the
island were able to get seats in it to see the ceremony.

they showed us also an enormous hanging stone perched on the edge of
a volcanos craterthe highest summit in the whole island. although
it was very far below us, we could see it quite plainly; and it looked
wobbly enough to be pushed off its perch with the hand. there was a
legend among the people, they said, that when the greatest of all
popsipetel kings should be crowned in the ivory chair, this hanging
stone would tumble into the volcanos mouth and go straight down to the
centre of the earth.

[illustration: the whispering rocks]

the doctor said he would like to go and examine it closer.

and when we were come to the lip of the volcano (it took us half a
day to get up to it) we found the stone was unbelievably largebig
as a cathedral. underneath it we could look right down into a black
hole which seemed to have no bottom. the doctor explained to us that
volcanoes sometimes spurted up fire from these holes in their tops; but
that those on floating islands were always cold and dead.

stubbins, he said, looking up at the great stone towering above us,
do you know what would most likely happen if that boulder should fall
in?

no, said i, what?

you remember the air-chamber which the porpoises told us lies under
the centre of the island?

yes.

well, this stone is heavy enough, if it fell into the volcano, to
break through into that air-chamber from above. and once it did, the
air would escape and the floating island would float no more. it would
sink.

but then everybody on it would be drowned, wouldnt they? said bumpo.

oh no, not necessarily. that would depend on the depth of the sea
where the sinking took place. the island might touch bottom when it
had only gone down, say, a hundred feet. but there would be lots of it
still sticking up above the water then, wouldnt there?

yes, said bumpo, i suppose there would. well, let us hope that the
ponderous fragment does _not_ lose its equilibriosity, for i dont
believe it would stop at the centre of the earthmore likely it would
fall right through the world and come out the other side.

many other wonders there were which these men showed us in the central
regions of their island. but i have not time or space to tell you of
them now.

descending towards the shore again, we noticed that we were still
being watched, even here among the highlands, by the bag-jagderags
who had followed us. and when we put to sea once more a boatload of
them proceeded to go ahead of us in the direction of popsipetel.
having lighter canoes, they traveled faster than our party; and we
judged that they should reach the villageif that was where they were
goingmany hours before we could.

the doctor was now becoming anxious to see how long arrow was getting
on, so we all took turns at the paddles and went on traveling by
moonlight through the whole night.

we reached popsipetel just as the dawn was breaking.

to our great surprise we found that not only we, but the whole village
also, had been up all night. a great crowd was gathered about the dead
chiefs house. and as we landed our canoes upon the beach we saw a
large number of old men, the seniors of the tribe, coming out at the
main door.

we inquired what was the meaning of all this; and were told that the
election of a new chief had been going on all through the whole night.
bumpo asked the name of the new chief; but this, it seemed, had not yet
been given out. it would be announced at mid-day.

as soon as the doctor had paid a visit to long arrow and seen that he
was doing nicely, we proceeded to our own house at the far end of the
village. here we ate some breakfast and then lay down to take a good
rest.

rest, indeed, we needed; for life had been strenuous and busy for us
ever since we had landed on the island. and it wasnt many minutes
after our weary heads struck the pillows that the whole crew of us were
sound asleep.




_the ninth chapter_

the election


we were awakened by music. the glaring noonday sunlight was streaming
in at our door, outside of which some kind of a band appeared to be
playing. we got up and looked out. our house was surrounded by the
whole population of popsipetel. we were used to having quite a number
of curious and admiring indians waiting at our door at all hours;
but this was quite different. the vast crowd was dressed in its best
clothes. bright beads, gawdy feathers and gay blankets gave cheerful
color to the scene. every one seemed in very good humor, singing or
playing on musical instrumentsmostly painted wooden whistles or drums
made from skins.

we found polynesiawho while we slept had arrived back from
bag-jagderagsitting on our door-post watching the show. we asked her
what all the holiday-making was about.

the result of the election has just been announced, said she. the
name of the new chief was given out at noon.

and who is the new chief? asked the doctor.

you are, said polynesia quietly.

_i!_ gasped the doctorwell, of all things!

yes, said she. youre the oneand whats more, theyve changed
your surname for you. they didnt think that dolittle was a proper or
respectful name for a man who had done so much. so you are now to be
known as jong thinkalot. how do you like it?

but i dont _want_ to be a chief, said the doctor in an irritable
voice.

im afraid youll have hard work to get out of it now, said
sheunless youre willing to put to sea again in one of their rickety
canoes. you see youve been elected not merely the chief of the
popsipetels; youre to be a kingthe king of the whole of spidermonkey
island. the bag-jagderags, who were so anxious to have you govern
them, sent spies and messengers ahead of you; and when they found that
you had been elected chief of the popsipetels overnight they were
bitterly disappointed. however, rather than lose you altogether, the
bag-jagderags were willing to give up their independence, and insisted
that they and their lands be united to the popsipetels in order that
you could be made king of both. so now youre in for it.

oh lord! groaned the doctor, i do wish they wouldnt be so
enthusiastic! bother it, i dont _want_ to be a king!

i should think, doctor, said i, youd feel rather proud and glad. i
wish _i_ had a chance to be a king.

oh i know it sounds grand, said he, pulling on his boots miserably.
but the trouble is, you cant take up responsibilities and then just
drop them again when you feel like it. i have my own work to do.
scarcely one moment have i had to give to natural history since i
landed on this island. ive been doing some one elses business all the
time. and now they want me to go on doing it! why, once im made king
of the popsipetels, thats the end of me as a useful naturalist. id be
too busy for anything. all id be then is just a ererjust a king.

well, thats something! said bumpo. my father is a king and has a
hundred and twenty wives.

that would make it worse, said the doctora hundred and twenty times
worse. i have my work to do. i dont want to be a king.

look, said polynesia, here come the head men to announce your
election. hurry up and get your boots laced.

the throng before our door had suddenly parted asunder, making a long
lane; and down this we now saw a group of personages coming towards us.
the man in front, a handsome old indian with a wrinkled face, carried
in his hands a wooden crowna truly beautiful and gorgeous crown, even
though of wood. wonderfully carved and painted, it had two lovely blue
feathers springing from the front of it. behind the old man came eight
strong indians bearing a litter, a sort of chair with long handles
underneath to carry it by.

kneeling down on one knee, bending his head almost to the ground, the
old man addressed the doctor who now stood in the doorway putting on
his collar and tie.

oh, mighty one, said he, we bring you word from the popsipetel
people. great are your deeds beyond belief, kind is your heart and your
wisdom, deeper than the sea. our chief is dead. the people clamor for a
worthy leader. our old enemies, the bag-jagderags are become, through
you, our brothers and good friends. they too desire to bask beneath the
sunshine of your smile. behold then, i bring to you the sacred crown of
popsipetel which, since ancient days when this island and its peoples
were one, beneath one monarch, has rested on no kingly brow. oh kindly
one, we are bidden by the united voices of the peoples of this land to
carry you to the whispering rocks, that there, with all respect and
majesty, you may be crowned our kingking of all the moving land.

the good indians did not seem to have even considered the possibility
of john dolittles refusing. as for the poor doctor, i never saw him so
upset by anything. it was in fact the only time i have known him to
get thoroughly fussed.

oh dear! i heard him murmur, looking around wildly for some escape.
what _shall_ i do?did any of you see where i laid that stud of
mine?how on earth can i get this collar on without a stud? what a day
this is, to be sure!maybe it rolled under the bed, bumpoi do think
they might have given me a day or so to think it over in. who ever
heard of waking a man right out of his sleep, and telling him hes got
to be a king, before he has even washed his face? cant any of you find
it? maybe youre standing on it, bumpo. move your feet.

oh dont bother about your stud, said polynesia. you will have to be
crowned without a collar. they wont know the difference.

i tell you im not going to be crowned, cried the doctornot if i
can help it. ill make them a speech. perhaps that will satisfy them.

he turned back to the indians at the door.

my friends, he said, i am not worthy of this great honor you would
do me. little or no skill have i in the arts of kingcraft. assuredly
among your own brave men you will find many better fitted to lead you.
for this compliment, this confidence and trust, i thank you. but, i
pray you, do not think of me for such high duties which i could not
possibly fulfil.

the old man repeated his words to the people behind him in a louder
voice. stolidly they shook their heads, moving not an inch. the old man
turned back to the doctor.

you are the chosen one, said he. they will have none but you.

into the doctors perplexed face suddenly there came a flash of hope.

ill go and see long arrow, he whispered to me. perhaps he will know
of some way to get me out of this.

and asking the personages to excuse him a moment, he left them there,
standing at his door, and hurried off in the direction of long arrows
house. i followed him.

we found our big friend lying on a grass bed outside his home, where he
had been moved that he might witness the holiday-making.

long arrow, said the doctor speaking quickly in eagle tongue so
that the bystanders should not overhear, in dire peril i come to you
for help. these men would make me their king. if such a thing befall
me, all the great work i hoped to do must go undone, for who is there
unfreer than a king? i pray you speak with them and persuade their kind
well-meaning hearts that what they plan to do would be unwise.

long arrow raised himself upon his elbow.

oh kindly one, said he (this seemed now to have become the usual
manner of address when speaking to the doctor), sorely it grieves me
that the first wish you ask of me i should be unable to grant. alas! i
can do nothing. these people have so set their hearts on keeping you
for king that if i tried to interfere they would drive me from their
land and likely crown you in the end in any case. a king you must be,
if only for a while. we must so arrange the business of governing that
you may have time to give to natures secrets. later we may be able to
hit upon some plan to relieve you of the burden of the crown. but for
now you must be king. these people are a headstrong tribe and they will
have their way. there is no other course.

sadly the doctor turned away from the bed and faced about. and there
behind him stood the old man again, the crown still held in his
wrinkled hands and the royal litter waiting at his elbow. with a deep
reverence the bearers motioned towards the seat of the chair, inviting
the white man to get in.

once more the poor doctor looked wildly, hopelessly about him for
some means of escape. for a moment i thought he was going to take to
his heels and run for it. but the crowd around us was far too thick
and densely packed for anyone to break through it. a band of whistles
and drums near by suddenly started the music of a solemn processional
march. he turned back pleadingly again to long arrow in a last appeal
for help. but the big indian merely shook his head and pointed, like
the bearers, to the waiting chair.

at last, almost in tears, john dolittle stepped slowly into the litter
and sat down. as he was hoisted on to the broad shoulders of the
bearers i heard him still feebly muttering beneath his breath,

botheration take it!i dont _want_ to be a king!

farewell! called long arrow from his bed, and may good fortune ever
stand within the shadow of your throne!

he comes!he comes! murmured the crowd. away! away!to the
whispering rocks!

and as the procession formed up to leave the village, the crowd about
us began hurrying off in the direction of the mountains to make sure of
good seats in the giant theatre where the crowning ceremony would take
place.




_the tenth chapter_

the coronation of king jong


in my long lifetime i have seen many grand and inspiring things, but
never anything that impressed me half as much as the sight of the
whispering rocks as they looked on the day king jong was crowned. as
bumpo, chee-chee, polynesia, jip and i finally reached the dizzy edge
of the great bowl and looked down inside it, it was like gazing over
a never-ending ocean of copper-colored faces; for every seat in the
theatre was filled, every man, woman and child in the islandincluding
long arrow who had been carried up on his sick bedwas there to see the
show.

yet not a sound, not a pin-drop, disturbed the solemn silence of the
whispering rocks. it was quite creepy and sent chills running up and
down your spine. bumpo told me afterwards that it took his breath away
too much for him to speak, but that he hadnt known before that there
were that many people in the world.

away down by the table of the throne stood a brand-new, brightly
colored totem-pole. all the indian families had totem-poles and kept
them set up before the doors of their houses. the idea of a totem-pole
is something like a door-plate or a visiting card. it represents in its
carvings the deeds and qualities of the family to which it belongs.
this one, beautifully decorated and much higher than any other, was the
dolittle or, as it was to be henceforth called, the royal thinkalot
totem. it had nothing but animals on it, to signify the doctors great
knowledge of creatures. and the animals chosen to be shown were those
which to the indians were supposed to represent good qualities of
character, such as, the deer for speed; the ox for perseverance; the
fish for discretion, and so on. but at the top of the totem is always
placed the sign or animal by which the family is most proud to be
known. this, on the thinkalot pole, was an enormous parrot, in memory
of the famous peace of the parrots.

the ivory throne had been all polished with scented oil and it
glistened whitely in the strong sunlight. at the foot of it there had
been strewn great quantities of branches of flowering trees, which with
the new warmth of milder climates were now blossoming in the valleys of
the island.

soon we saw the royal litter, with the doctor seated in it, slowly
ascending the winding steps of the table. reaching the flat top at
last, it halted and the doctor stepped out upon the flowery carpet. so
still and perfect was the silence that even at that distance above i
distinctly heard a twig snap beneath his tread.

walking to the throne accompanied by the old man, the doctor got up
upon the stand and sat down. how tiny his little round figure looked
when seen from that tremendous height! the throne had been made for
longer-legged kings; and when he was seated, his feet did not reach the
ground but dangled six inches from the top step.

then the old man turned round and looking up at the people began to
speak in a quiet even voice; but every word he said was easily heard in
the furthest corner of the whispering rocks.

first he recited the names of all the great popsipetel kings who
in days long ago had been crowned in this ivory chair. he spoke of
the greatness of the popsipetel people, of their triumphs, of their
hardships. then waving his hand towards the doctor he began recounting
the things which this king-to-be had done. and i am bound to say that
they easily outmatched the deeds of those who had gone before him.

as soon as he started to speak of what the doctor had achieved for the
tribe, the people, still strictly silent, all began waving their right
hands towards the throne. this gave to the vast theatre a very singular
appearance: acres and acres of something movingwith never a sound.

at last the old man finished his speech and stepping up to the chair,
very respectfully removed the doctors battered high hat. he was about
to put it upon the ground; but the doctor took it from him hastily and
kept it on his lap. then taking up the sacred crown he placed it upon
john dolittles head. it did not fit very well (for it had been made
for smaller-headed kings), and when the wind blew in freshly from the
sunlit sea the doctor had some difficulty in keeping it on. but it
looked very splendid.

turning once more to the people, the old man said,

men of popsipetel, behold your elected king!are you content?

and then at last the voice of the people broke loose.

jong! jong! they shouted, long live king jong!

the sound burst upon the solemn silence with the crash of a hundred
cannon. there, where even a whisper carried miles, the shock of it was
like a blow in the face. back and forth the mountains threw it to one
another. i thought the echoes of it would never die away as it passed
rumbling through the whole island, jangling among the lower valleys,
booming in the distant sea-caves.

suddenly i saw the old man point upward, to the highest mountain in the
island; and looking over my shoulder, i was just in time to see the
hanging stone topple slowly out of sightdown into the heart of the
volcano.

see ye, men of the moving land! the old man cried: the stone has
fallen and our legend has come true: the king of kings is crowned this
day!

the doctor too had seen the stone fall and he was now standing up
looking at the sea expectantly.

hes thinking of the air-chamber, said bumpo in my ear. let us hope
that the sea isnt very deep in these parts.

after a full minute (so long did it take the stone to fall that depth)
we heard a muffled, distant, crunching thudand then immediately after,
a great hissing of escaping air. the doctor, his face tense with
anxiety, sat down in the throne again still watching the blue water of
the ocean with staring eyes.

soon we felt the island slowly sinking beneath us. we saw the sea creep
inland over the beaches as the shores went downone foot, three feet,
ten feet, twenty, fifty, a hundred. and then, thank goodness, gently as
a butterfly alighting on a rose, it stopped! spidermonkey island had
come to rest on the sandy bottom of the atlantic, and earth was joined
to earth once more.

of course many of the houses near the shores were now under water.
popsipetel village itself had entirely disappeared. but it didnt
matter. no one was drowned; for every soul in the island was high up
in the hills watching the coronation of king jong.

the indians themselves did not realize at the time what was taking
place, though of course they had felt the land sinking beneath them.
the doctor told us afterwards that it must have been the shock of that
tremendous shout, coming from a million throats at once, which had
toppled the hanging stone off its perch. but in popsipetel history the
story was handed down (and it is firmly believed to this day) that when
king jong sat upon the throne, so great was his mighty weight, that the
very island itself sank down to do him honor and never moved again.

[illustration]




part six




_the first chapter_

new popsipetel


jong thinkalot had not ruled over his new kingdom for more than a
couple of days before my notions about kings and the kind of lives they
led changed very considerably. i had thought that all that kings had to
do was to sit on a throne and have people bow down before them several
times a day. i now saw that a king can be the hardest-working man in
the worldif he attends properly to his business.

from the moment that he got up, early in the morning, till the time he
went to bed, late at nightseven days in the weekjohn dolittle was
busy, busy, busy. first of all there was the new town to be built. the
village of popsipetel had disappeared: the city of new popsipetel must
be made. with great care a place was chosen for itand a very beautiful
position it was, at the mouth of a large river. the shores of the
island at this point formed a lovely wide bay where canoesand ships
too, if they should ever comecould lie peacefully at anchor without
danger from storms.

in building this town the doctor gave the indians a lot of new
ideas. he showed them what town-sewers were, and how garbage should
be collected each day and burnt. high up in the hills he made a large
lake by damming a stream. this was the water-supply for the town. none
of these things had the indians ever seen; and many of the sicknesses
which they had suffered from before were now entirely prevented by
proper drainage and pure drinking-water.

peoples who dont use fire do not of course have metals either; because
without fire it is almost impossible to shape iron and steel. one of
the first things that john dolittle did was to search the mountains
till he found iron and copper mines. then he set to work to teach the
indians how these metals could be melted and made into knives and plows
and water-pipes and all manner of things.

in his kingdom the doctor tried his hardest to do away with most of the
old-fashioned pomp and grandeur of a royal court. as he said to bumpo
and me, if he must be a king he meant to be a thoroughly democratic
one, that is a king who is chummy and friendly with his subjects and
doesnt put on airs. and when he drew up the plans for the city of new
popsipetel he had no palace shown of any kind. a little cottage in a
back street was all that he had provided for himself.

but this the indians would not permit on any account. they had been
used to having their kings rule in a truly grand and kingly manner;
and they insisted that he have built for himself the most magnificent
palace ever seen. in all else they let him have his own way absolutely;
but they wouldnt allow him to wriggle out of any of the ceremony or
show that goes with being a king. a thousand servants he had to keep in
his palace, night and day, to wait on him. the royal canoe had to be
kept upa gorgeous, polished mahogany boat, seventy feet long, inlaid
with mother-o-pearl and paddled by the hundred strongest men in the
island. the palace-gardens covered a square mile and employed a hundred
and sixty gardeners.

even in his dress the poor man was compelled always to be grand and
elegant and uncomfortable. the beloved and battered high hat was put
away in a closet and only looked at secretly. state robes had to be
worn on all occasions. and when the doctor did once in a while manage
to sneak off for a short, natural-history expedition he never dared to
wear his old clothes, but had to chase his butterflies with a crown
upon his head and a scarlet cloak flying behind him in the wind.

there was no end to the kinds of duties the doctor had to perform and
the questions he had to decide uponeverything, from settling disputes
about lands and boundaries, to making peace between husband and wife
who had been throwing shoes at one another. in the east wing of the
royal palace was the hall of justice. and here king jong sat every
morning from nine to eleven passing judgment on all cases that were
brought before him.

[illustration: had to chase his butterflies with a crown upon his
head]

then in the afternoon he taught school. the sort of things he taught
were not always those you find in ordinary schools. grown-ups as well
as children came to learn. you see, these indians were ignorant of many
of the things that quite small white children knowthough it is also
true that they knew a lot that white grown-ups never dreamed of.

bumpo and i helped with the teaching as far as we couldsimple
arithmetic, and easy things like that. but the classes in astronomy,
farming science, the proper care of babies, with a host of other
subjects, the doctor had to teach himself. the indians were
tremendously keen about the schooling and they came in droves and
crowds; so that even with the open-air classes (a school-house was
impossible of course) the doctor had to take them in relays and batches
of five or six thousand at a time and used a big megaphone or trumpet
to make himself heard.

the rest of his day was more than filled with road-making, building
water-mills, attending the sick and a million other things.

in spite of his being so unwilling to become a king, john dolittle
made a very good oneonce he got started. he may not have been as
dignified as many kings in history who were always running off to war
and getting themselves into romantic situations; but since i have grown
up and seen something of foreign lands and governments i have often
thought that popsipetel under the reign of jong thinkalot was perhaps
the best ruled state in the history of the world.

the doctors birthday came round after we had been on the island
six months and a half. the people made a great public holiday of it
and there was much feasting, dancing, fireworks, speechmaking and
jollification.

towards the close of the day the chief men of the two tribes formed a
procession and passed through the streets of the town, carrying a very
gorgeously painted tablet of ebony wood, ten feet high. this was a
picture-history, such as they preserved for each of the ancient kings
of popsipetel to record their deeds.

with great and solemn ceremony it was set up over the door of the new
palace: and everybody then clustered round to look at it. it had six
pictures on it commemorating the six great events in the life of king
jong and beneath were written the verses that explained them. they were
composed by the court poet; and this is a translation:


i

(_his landing on the island_)

    heaven-sent,
    in his dolphin-drawn canoe
    from worlds unknown
    he landed on our shores.
    the very palms
    bowed down their heads
    in welcome to the coming king.


ii

(_his meeting with the beetle_)

    by moonlight in the mountains
    he communed with beasts.
    the shy jabizri brings him picture-words
    of great distress.


iii

(_he liberates the lost families_)

    big was his heart with pity;
    big were his hands with strength.
    see how he tears the mountain like a yam!
    see how the lost ones
    dance forth to greet the day!


iv

(_he makes fire_)

    our land was cold and dying.
    he waved his hand and lo!
    lightning leapt from cloudless skies;
    the sun leant down;
    and fire was born!
    then while we crowded round
    the grateful glow, pushed he
    our wayward, floating land
    back to peaceful anchorage
    in sunny seas.


v

(_he leads the people to victory in war_)

    once only
    was his kindly countenance
    darkened by a deadly frown.
    woe to the wicked enemy
    that dares attack
    the tribe with thinkalot for chief!


vi

(_he is crowned king_)

    the birds of the air rejoiced;
    the sea laughed and gambolled with her shores;
    all red-skins wept for joy
    the day we crowned him king.
    he is the builder, the healer, the teacher and the prince;
    he is the greatest of them all.
    may he live a thousand thousand years,
    happy in his heart,
    to bless our land with peace.




_the second chapter_

thoughts of home


in the royal palace bumpo and i had a beautiful suite of rooms of our
very ownwhich polynesia, jip and chee-chee shared with us. officially
bumpo was minister of the interior; while i was first lord of the
treasury. long arrow also had quarters there; but at present he was
absent, traveling abroad.

one night after supper when the doctor was away in the town somewhere
visiting a new-born baby, we were all sitting round the big table in
bumpos reception-room. this we did every evening, to talk over the
plans for the following day and various affairs of state. it was a kind
of cabinet meeting.

to-night however we were talking about englandand also about things
to eat. we had got a little tired of indian food. you see, none of
the natives knew how to cook; and we had the most discouraging time
training a chef for the royal kitchen. most of them were champions at
spoiling good food. often we got so hungry that the doctor would sneak
downstairs with us into the palace basement, after all the cooks were
safe in bed, and fry pancakes secretly over the dying embers of the
fire. the doctor himself was the finest cook that ever lived. but he
used to make a terrible mess of the kitchen; and of course we had to be
awfully careful that we didnt get caught.

well, as i was saying, to-night food was the subject of discussion at
the cabinet meeting; and i had just been reminding bumpo of the nice
dishes we had had at the bed-makers house in monteverde.

i tell you what i would like now, said bumpo: a large cup of cocoa
with whipped cream on the top of it. in oxford we used to be able to
get the most wonderful cocoa. it is really too bad they havent any
cocoa-trees in this island, or cows to give cream.

when do you suppose, asked jip, the doctor intends to move on from
here?

i was talking to him about that only yesterday, said polynesia. but
i couldnt get any satisfactory answer out of him. he didnt seem to
want to speak about it.

there was a pause in the conversation.

do you know what i believe? she added presently. i believe the
doctor has given up even thinking of going home.

good lord! cried bumpo. you dont say!

sh! said polynesia. whats that noise?

we listened; and away off in the distant corridors of the palace we
heard the sentries crying,

the king!make way!the king!

its heat last, whispered polynesialate, as usual. poor man, how
he does work!chee-chee, get the pipe and tobacco out of the cupboard
and lay the dressing-gown ready on his chair.

when the doctor came into the room he looked serious and thoughtful.
wearily he took off his crown and hung it on a peg behind the door.
then he exchanged the royal cloak for the dressing-gown, dropped into
his chair at the head of the table with a deep sigh and started to fill
his pipe.

well, asked polynesia quietly, how did you find the baby?

the baby? he murmuredhis thoughts still seemed to be very far
awayah yes. the baby was much better, thank youit has cut its second
tooth.

then he was silent again, staring dreamily at the ceiling through a
cloud of tobacco-smoke; while we all sat round quite still, waiting.

we were wondering, doctor, said i at last,just before you came
inwhen you would be starting home again. we will have been on this
island seven months to-morrow.

the doctor sat forward in his chair looking rather uncomfortable.

well, as a matter of fact, said he after a moment, i meant to speak
to you myself this evening on that very subject. but itsera little
hard to make any one exactly understand the situation. i am afraid
that it would be impossible for me to leave the work i am now engaged
on.... you remember, when they first insisted on making me king, i told
you it was not easy to shake off responsibilities, once you had taken
them up. these people have come to rely on me for a great number of
things. we found them ignorant of much that white people enjoy. and we
have, one might say, changed the current of their lives considerably.
now it is a very ticklish business, to change the lives of other
people. and whether the changes we have made will be, in the end, for
good or for bad, is our lookout.

he thought a momentthen went on in a quieter, sadder voice:

i would like to continue my voyages and my natural history work; and
i would like to go back to puddlebyas much as any of you. this is
march, and the crocuses will be showing in the lawn.... but that which
i feared has come true: i cannot close my eyes to what might happen if
i should leave these people and run away. they would probably go back
to their old habits and customs: wars, superstitions, devil-worship and
what not; and many of the new things we have taught them might be put
to improper use and make their condition, then, worse by far than that
in which we found them.... they like me; they trust me; they have come
to look to me for help in all their problems and troubles. and no man
wants to do unfair things to them who trust him.... and then again, _i_
like _them_. they are, as it were, my childreni never had any children
of my ownand i am terribly interested in how they will grow up. dont
you see what i mean?how can i possibly run away and leave them in the
lurch?... no. i have thought it over a good deal and tried to decide
what was best. and i am afraid that the work i took up when i assumed
the crown i must stick to. im afraidive got to stay.

for goodfor your whole life? asked bumpo in a low voice.

for some moments the doctor, frowning, made no answer.

i dont know, he said at lastanyhow for the present there is
certainly no hope of my leaving. it wouldnt be right.

the sad silence that followed was broken finally by a knock upon the
door.

with a patient sigh the doctor got up and put on his crown and cloak
again.

come in, he called, sitting down in his chair once more.

the door opened and a footmanone of the hundred and forty-three who
were always on night dutystood bowing in the entrance.

oh, kindly one, said he, there is a traveler at the palace-gate who
would have speech with your majesty.

another babys been born, ill bet a shilling, muttered polynesia.

did you ask the travelers name? enquired the doctor.

yes, your majesty, said the footman. it is long arrow, the son of
golden arrow.




_the third chapter_

the red mans science


long arrow! cried the doctor. how splendid! show him inshow him in
at once.

im so glad, he continued, turning to us as soon as the footman had
gone. ive missed long arrow terribly. hes an awfully good man to
have aroundeven if he doesnt talk much. let me see: its five months
now since he went off to brazil. im so glad hes back safe. he does
take such tremendous chances with that canoe of hisclever as he is.
its no joke, crossing a hundred miles of open sea in a twelve-foot
canoe. i wouldnt care to try it.

another knock; and when the door swung open in answer to the doctors
call, there stood our big friend on the threshold, a smile upon his
strong, bronzed face. behind him appeared two porters carrying loads
done up in indian palm-matting. these, when the first salutations were
over, long arrow ordered to lay their burdens down.

behold, oh kindly one, said he, i bring you, as i promised, my
collection of plants which i had hidden in a cave in the andes. these
treasures represent the labors of my life.

the packages were opened; and inside were many smaller packages and
bundles. carefully they were laid out in rows upon the table.

it appeared at first a large but disappointing display. there were
plants, flowers, fruits, leaves, roots, nuts, beans, honeys, gums,
bark, seeds, bees and a few kinds of insects.

the study of plantsor botany, as it is calledwas a kind of natural
history which had never interested me very much. i had considered it,
compared with the study of animals, a dull science. but as long arrow
began taking up the various things in his collection and explaining
their qualities to us, i became more and more fascinated. and before
he had done i was completely absorbed by the wonders of the vegetable
kingdom which he had brought so far.

these, said he, taking up a little packet of big seeds, are what i
have called laughing-beans.

what are they for? asked bumpo.

to cause mirth, said the indian.

bumpo, while long arrows back was turned, took three of the beans and
swallowed them.

alas! said the indian when he discovered what bumpo had done. if he
wished to try the powers of these seeds he should have eaten no more
than a quarter of a one. let us hope that he does not die of laughter.

the beans effect upon bumpo was most extraordinary. first he broke
into a broad smile; then he began to giggle; finally he burst into
such prolonged roars of hearty laughter that we had to carry him into
the next room and put him to bed. the doctor said afterwards that he
probably would have died laughing if he had not had such a strong
constitution. all through the night he gurgled happily in his sleep.
and even when we woke him up the next morning he rolled out of bed
still chuckling.

returning to the reception room, we were shown some red roots which
long arrow told us had the property, when made into a soup with sugar
and salt, of causing people to dance with extraordinary speed and
endurance. he asked us to try them; but we refused, thanking him. after
bumpos exhibition we were a little afraid of any more experiments for
the present.

there was no end to the curious and useful things that long arrow
had collected: an oil from a vine which would make hair grow in one
night; an orange as big as a pumpkin which he had raised in his own
mountain-garden in peru; a black honey (he had brought the bees that
made it too and the seeds of the flowers they fed on) which would put
you to sleep, just with a teaspoonful, and make you wake up fresh
in the morning; a nut that made the voice beautiful for singing;
a water-weed that stopped cuts from bleeding; a moss that cured
snake-bite; a lichen that prevented sea-sickness.

the doctor of course was tremendously interested. well into the early
hours of the morning he was busy going over the articles on the table
one by one, listing their names and writing their properties and
descriptions into a note-book as long arrow dictated.

there are things here, stubbins, he said as he ended, which in the
hands of skilled druggists will make a vast difference to the medicine
and chemistry of the world. i suspect that this sleeping-honey by
itself will take the place of half the bad drugs we have had to use so
far. long arrow has discovered a pharmacopia of his own. miranda was
right: he is a great naturalist. his name deserves to be placed beside
linnus. some day i must get all these things to englandbut when, he
added sadlyyes, thats the problem: when?




_the fourth chapter_

the sea-serpent


for a long time after that cabinet meeting of which i have just told
you we did not ask the doctor anything further about going home. life
in spidermonkey island went forward, month in month out, busily and
pleasantly. the winter, with christmas celebrations, came and went, and
summer was with us once again before we knew it.

as time passed the doctor became more and more taken up with the care
of his big family; and the hours he could spare for his natural history
work grew fewer and fewer. i knew that he often still thought of his
house and garden in puddleby and of his old plans and ambitions;
because once in a while we would notice his face grow thoughtful and a
little sad, when something reminded him of england or his old life. but
he never spoke of these things. and i truly believe he would have spent
the remainder of his days on spidermonkey island if it hadnt been for
an accidentand for polynesia.

the old parrot had grown very tired of the indians and she made no
secret of it.

the very idea, she said to me one day as we were walking on the
seashorethe idea of the famous john dolittle spending his valuable
life waiting on these greasy natives!why, its preposterous!

all that morning we had been watching the doctor superintend the
building of the new theatre in popsipetelthere was already an
opera-house and a concert-hall; and finally she had got so grouchy and
annoyed at the sight that i had suggested her taking a walk with me.

do you really think, i asked as we sat down on the sands, that he
will never go back to puddleby again?

i dont know, said she. at one time i felt sure that the thought
of the pets he had left behind at the house would take him home soon.
but since miranda brought him word last august that everything was all
right there, that hopes gone. for months and months ive been racking
my brains to think up a plan. if we could only hit upon something that
would turn his thoughts back to natural history againi mean something
big enough to get him really excitedwe might manage it. but how?she
shrugged her shoulders in disgusthow?when all he thinks of now is
paving streets and teaching papooses that twice one are two!

it was a perfect popsipetel day, bright and hot, blue and yellow.
drowsily i looked out to sea thinking of my mother and father. i
wondered if they were getting anxious over my long absence. beside me
old polynesia went on grumbling away in low steady tones; and her words
began to mingle and mix with the gentle lapping of the waves upon the
shore. it may have been the even murmur of her voice, helped by the
soft and balmy air, that lulled me to sleep. i dont know. anyhow i
presently dreamed that the island had moved againnot floatingly as
before, but suddenly, jerkily, as though something enormously powerful
had heaved it up from its bed just once and let it down.

how long i slept after that i have no idea. i was awakened by a gentle
pecking on the nose.

tommy!tommy! (it was polynesias voice) wake up!gosh, what a boy,
to sleep through an earthquake and never notice it!tommy, listen:
heres our chance now. wake _up_, for goodness sake!

whats the matter? i asked sitting up with a yawn.

sh!look! whispered polynesia pointing out to sea.

still only half awake, i stared before me with bleary, sleep-laden
eyes. and in the shallow water, not more than thirty yards from shore
i saw an enormous pale pink shell. dome-shaped, it towered up in a
graceful rainbow curve to a tremendous height; and round its base the
surf broke gently in little waves of white. it could have belonged to
the wildest dream.

what in the world is it? i asked.

that, whispered polynesia, is what sailors for hundreds of years
have called the _sea-serpent_. ive seen it myself more than once from
the decks of ships, at long range, curving in and out of the water.
but now that i see it close and still, i very strongly suspect that
the sea-serpent of history is no other than the great glass sea-snail
that the fidgit told us of. if that isnt the only fish of its kind in
the seven seas, call me a carrion-crowtommy, were in luck. our job
is to get the doctor down here to look at that prize specimen before
it moves off to the deep hole. if we can, then trust me, we may leave
this blessed island yet. you stay here and keep an eye on it while i
go after the doctor. dont move or speakdont even breathe heavy: he
might get scaredawful timid things, snails. just watch him; and ill
be back in two shakes.

stealthily creeping up the sands till she could get behind the cover
of some bushes before she took to her wings, polynesia went off in
the direction of the town; while i remained alone upon the shore
fascinatedly watching this unbelievable monster wallowing in the
shallow sea.

it moved very little. from time to time it lifted its head out of the
water showing its enormously long neck and horns. occasionally it
would try and draw itself up, the way a snail does when he goes to
move, but almost at once it would sink down again as if exhausted. it
seemed to me to act as though it were hurt underneath; but the lower
part of it, which was below the level of the water, i could not see.

i was still absorbed in watching the great beast when polynesia
returned with the doctor. they approached so silently and so cautiously
that i neither saw nor heard them coming till i found them crouching
beside me on the sand.

one sight of the snail changed the doctor completely. his eyes just
sparkled with delight. i had not seen him so thrilled and happy since
the time we caught the jabizri beetle when we first landed on the
island.

it is he! he whisperedthe great glass sea-snail himselfnot a doubt
of it. polynesia, go down the shore away and see if you can find any
of the porpoises for me. perhaps they can tell us what the snail is
doing hereits very unusual for him to be in shallow water like this.
and stubbins, you go over to the harbor and bring me a small canoe. but
be most careful how you paddle it round into this bay. if the snail
should take fright and go out into the deeper water, we may never get a
chance to see him again.

and dont tell any of the indians, polynesia added in a whisper as
i moved to go. we must keep this a secret or well have a crowd of
sightseers round here in five minutes. its mighty lucky we found the
snail in a quiet bay.

reaching the harbor, i picked out a small light canoe from among the
number that were lying there and without telling any one what i wanted
it for, got in and started off to paddle it down the shore.

i was mortally afraid that the snail might have left before i got back.
and you can imagine how delighted i was, when i rounded a rocky cape
and came in sight of the bay, to find he was still there.

polynesia, i saw, had got her errand done and returned ahead of me,
bringing with her a pair of porpoises. these were already conversing in
low tones with john dolittle. i beached the canoe and went up to listen.

what i want to know, the doctor was saying, is how the snail comes
to be here. i was given to understand that he usually stayed in the
deep hole; and that when he did come to the surface it was always in
mid-ocean.

oh, didnt you know?havent you heard? the porpoises replied: you
covered up the deep hole when you sank the island. why yes: you let it
down right on top of the mouth of the holesort of put the lid on, as
it were. the fishes that were in it at the time have been trying to get
out ever since. the great snail had the worst luck of all: the island
nipped him by the tail just as he was leaving the hole for a quiet
evening stroll. and he was held there for six months trying to wriggle
himself free. finally he had to heave the whole island up at one end to
get his tail loose. didnt you feel a sort of an earthquake shock about
an hour ago?

yes i did, said the doctor, it shook down part of the theatre i was
building.

well, that was the snail heaving up the island to get out of the
hole, they said. all the other fishes saw their chance and escaped
when he raised the lid. it was lucky for them hes so big and strong.
but the strain of that terrific heave told on him: he sprained a muscle
in his tail and it started swelling rather badly. he wanted some quiet
place to rest up; and seeing this soft beach handy he crawled in here.

dear me! said the doctor. im terribly sorry. i suppose i should
have given some sort of notice that the island was going to be let
down. but, to tell the truth, we didnt know it ourselves; it happened
by a kind of an accident. do you imagine the poor fellow is hurt very
badly?

were not sure, said the porpoises; because none of us can speak his
language. but we swam right around him on our way in here, and he did
not seem to be really seriously injured.

cant any of your people speak shellfish? the doctor asked.

not a word, said they. its a most frightfully difficult language.

do you think that you might be able to find me some kind of a fish
that could?

we dont know, said the porpoises. we might try.

i should be extremely grateful to you if you would, said the doctor.
there are many important questions i want to ask this snailand
besides, i would like to do my best to cure his tail for him. its the
least i can do. after all, it was my fault, indirectly, that he got
hurt.

well, if you wait here, said the porpoises, well see what can be
done.




_the fifth chapter_

the shellfish riddle solved at last


so doctor dolittle with a crown on his head sat down upon the shore
like king knut, and waited. and for a whole hour the porpoises kept
going and coming, bringing up different kinds of sea-beasts from the
deep to see if they could help him.

many and curious were the creatures they produced. it would seem
however that there were very few things that spoke shellfish except
the shellfish themselves. still, the porpoises grew a little more
hopeful when they discovered a very old sea-urchin (a funny, ball-like,
little fellow with long whiskers all over him) who said he could not
speak pure shellfish, but he used to understand starfishenough to get
alongwhen he was young. this was coming nearer, even if it wasnt
anything to go crazy about. leaving the urchin with us, the porpoises
went off once more to hunt up a starfish.

they were not long getting one, for they were quite common in those
parts. then, using the sea-urchin as an interpreter, they questioned
the starfish. he was a rather stupid sort of creature; but he tried his
best to be helpful. and after a little patient examination we found to
our delight that he could speak shellfish moderately well.

feeling quite encouraged, the doctor and i now got into the canoe; and,
with the porpoises, the urchin and the starfish swimming alongside, we
paddled very gently out till we were close under the towering shell of
the great snail.

and then began the most curious conversation i have ever witnessed.
first the starfish would ask the snail something; and whatever answer
the snail gave, the starfish would tell it to the sea-urchin, the
urchin would tell it to the porpoises and the porpoises would tell it
to the doctor.

in this way we obtained considerable information, mostly about the very
ancient history of the animal kingdom; but we missed a good many of the
finer points in the snails longer speeches on account of the stupidity
of the starfish and all this translating from one language to another.

while the snail was speaking, the doctor and i put our ears against the
wall of his shell and found that we could in this way hear the sound of
his voice quite plainly. it was, as the fidgit had described, deep and
bell-like. but of course we could not understand a single word he said.
however the doctor was by this time terrifically excited about getting
near to learning the language he had sought so long. and presently by
making the other fishes repeat over and over again short phrases which
the snail used, he began to put words together for himself. you see,
he was already familiar with one or two fish languages; and that helped
him quite a little. after he had practised for a while like this he
leant over the side of the canoe and putting his face below the water,
tried speaking to the snail direct.

it was hard and difficult work; and hours went by before he got any
results. but presently i could tell by the happy look on his face that
little by little he was succeeding.

the sun was low in the west and the cool evening breeze was beginning
to rustle softly through the bamboo-groves when the doctor finally
turned from his work and said to me,

stubbins, i have persuaded the snail to come in on to the dry part of
the beach and let me examine his tail. will you please go back to the
town and tell the workmen to stop working on the theatre for to-day?
then go on to the palace and get my medicine-bag. i think i left it
under the throne in the audience chamber.

and remember, polynesia whispered as i turned away, not a word to
a soul. if you get asked questions, keep your mouth shut. pretend you
have a toothache or something.

this time when i got back to the shorewith the medicine-bagi found
the snail high and dry on the beach. seeing him in his full length like
this, it was easy to understand how old-time, superstitious sailors
had called him the sea-serpent. he certainly was a most gigantic, and
in his way, a graceful, beautiful creature. john dolittle was examining
a swelling on his tail.

from the bag which i had brought the doctor took a large bottle of
embrocation and began rubbing the sprain. next he took all the bandages
he had in the bag and fastened them end to end. but even like that,
they were not long enough to go more than halfway round the enormous
tail. the doctor insisted that he must get the swelling strapped tight
somehow. so he sent me off to the palace once more to get all the
sheets from the royal linen-closet. these polynesia and i tore into
bandages for him. and at last, after terrific exertions, we got the
sprain strapped to his satisfaction.

the snail really seemed to be quite pleased with the attention he had
received; and he stretched himself in lazy comfort when the doctor was
done. in this position, when the shell on his back was empty, you could
look right through it and see the palm-trees on the other side.

i think one of us had better sit up with him all night, said the
doctor. we might put bumpo on that duty; hes been napping all day, i
knowin the summer-house. its a pretty bad sprain, that; and if the
snail shouldnt be able to sleep, hell be happier with some one with
him for company. hell get all right thoughin a few days i should
judge. if i wasnt so confoundedly busy id sit up with him myself. i
wish i could, because i still have a lot of things to talk over with
him.

but doctor, said polynesia as we prepared to go back to the town,
you ought to take a holiday. all kings take holidays once in the
whileevery one of them. king charles, for instanceof course charles
was before your timebut he!why, he was _always_ holiday-making. not
that he was ever what you would call a model king. but just the same,
he was frightfully popular. everybody liked himeven the golden-carp in
the fish-pond at hampton court. as a king, the only thing i had against
him was his inventing those stupid, little, snappy dogs they call king
charles spaniels. there are lots of stories told about poor charles;
but that, in my opinion, is the worst thing he did. however, all this
is beside the point. as i was saying, kings have to take holidays the
same as anybody else. and you havent taken one since you were crowned,
have you now?

no, said the doctor, i suppose thats true.

well now i tell you what you do, said she: as soon as you get back
to the palace you publish a royal proclamation that you are going away
for a week into the country for your health. and youre going _without
any servants_, you understandjust like a plain person. its called
traveling incognito, when kings go off like that. they all do itits
the only way they can ever have a good time. then the week youre away
you can spend lolling on the beach back there with the snail. hows
that?

id like to, said the doctor. it sounds most attractive. but theres
that new theatre to be built; none of our carpenters would know how to
get those rafters on without me to show themand then there are the
babies: these native mothers are so frightfully ignorant.

oh bother the theatreand the babies too, snapped polynesia. the
theatre can wait a week. and as for babies, they never have anything
more than colic. how do you suppose babies got along before you came
here, for heavens sake?take a holiday.... you need it.




_the sixth chapter_

the last cabinet meeting


from the way polynesia talked, i guessed that this idea of a holiday
was part of her plan.

the doctor made no reply; and we walked on silently towards the town. i
could see, nevertheless that her words had made an impression on him.

after supper he disappeared from the palace without saying where he was
goinga thing he had never done before. of course we all knew where he
had gone: back to the beach to sit up with the snail. we were sure of
it because he had said nothing to bumpo about attending to the matter.

as soon as the doors were closed upon the cabinet meeting that night,
polynesia addressed the ministry:

look here, you fellows, said she: weve simply got to get the doctor
to take this holiday somehowunless were willing to stay in this
blessed island for the rest of our lives.

but what difference, bumpo asked, is his taking a holiday going to
make?

impatiently polynesia turned upon the minister of the interior.

dont you see? if he has a clear week to get thoroughly interested in
his natural history againmarine stuff, his dream of seeing the floor
of the ocean and all thatthere may be some chance of his consenting
to leave this pesky place. but while he is here on duty as king he
never gets a moment to think of anything outside of the business of
government.

yes, thats true. hes far too consententious, bumpo agreed.

and besides, polynesia went on, his only hope of ever getting away
from here would be to escape secretly. hes got to leave while he is
holiday-making, incognitowhen no one knows where he is or what hes
doing, but us. if he built a ship big enough to cross the sea in, all
the indians would see it, and hear it, being built; and theyd ask what
it was for. they would interfere. theyd sooner have anything happen
than lose the doctor. why, i believe if they thought he had any idea of
escaping they would put chains on him.

yes, i really think they would, i agreed. yet without a ship of some
kind i dont see how the doctor is going to get away, even secretly.

well, ill tell you, said polynesia. if we do succeed in making
him take this holiday, our next step will be to get the sea-snail
to promise to take us all in his shell and carry us to the mouth of
puddleby river. if we can once get the snail willing, the temptation
will be too much for john dolittle and hell come, i knowespecially as
hell be able to take those new plants and drugs of long arrows to the
english doctors, as well as see the floor of the ocean on the way.

how thrilling! i cried. do you mean the snail could take us under
the sea all the way back to puddleby?

certainly, said polynesia, a little trip like that is nothing to
him. he would crawl along the floor of the ocean and the doctor could
see all the sights. perfectly simple. oh, john dolittle will come all
right, if we can only get him to take that holiday_and_ if the snail
will consent to give us the ride.

golly, i hope he does! sighed jip. im sick of these beastly
tropicsthey make you feel so lazy and good-for-nothing. and there
are no rats or anything herenot that a fellow would have the energy
to chase em even if there were. my, wouldnt i be glad to see old
puddleby and the garden again! and wont dab-dab be glad to have us
back!

by the end of next month, said i, it will be two whole years since
we left englandsince we pulled up the anchor at kingsbridge and bumped
our way out into the river.

and got stuck on the mud-bank, added chee-chee in a dreamy, far-away
voice.

do you remember how all the people waved to us from the river-wall? i
asked.

yes. and i suppose theyve often talked about us in the town since,
said jipwondering whether were dead or alive.

cease, said bumpo, i feel i am about to weep from sediment.




_the seventh chapter_

the doctors decision


well, you can guess how glad we were when next morning the doctor,
after his all-night conversation with the snail, told us that he had
made up his mind to take the holiday. a proclamation was published
right away by the town crier that his majesty was going into the
country for a seven-day rest, but that during his absence the palace
and the government offices would be kept open as usual.

polynesia was immensely pleased. she at once set quietly to work making
arrangements for our departuretaking good care the while that no one
should get an inkling of where we were going, what we were taking with
us, the hour of our leaving or which of the palace-gates we would go
out by.

cunning old schemer that she was, she forgot nothing. and not even we,
who were of the doctors party, could imagine what reasons she had
for some of her preparations. she took me inside and told me that the
one thing i must remember to bring with me was _all_ of the doctors
note-books. long arrow, who was the only indian let into the secret
of our destination, said he would like to come with us as far as the
beach to see the great snail; and him polynesia told to be sure and
bring his collection of plants. bumpo she ordered to carry the doctors
high hatcarefully hidden under his coat. she sent off nearly all the
footmen who were on night duty to do errands in the town, so that there
should be as few servants as possible to see us leave. and midnight,
the hour when most of the townspeople would be asleep, she finally
chose for our departure.

we had to take a weeks food-supply with us for the royal holiday. so,
with our other packages, we were heavy laden when on the stroke of
twelve we opened the west door of the palace and stepped cautiously and
quietly into the moonlit garden.

tiptoe incognito, whispered bumpo as we gently closed the heavy doors
behind us.

no one had seen us leave.

at the foot of the stone steps leading from the peacock terrace to the
sunken rosary, something made me pause and look back at the magnificent
palace which we had built in this strange, far-off land where no white
men but ourselves had ever come. somehow i felt it in my bones that we
were leaving it to-night never to return again. and i wondered what
other kings and ministers would dwell in its splendid halls when we
were gone. the air was hot; and everything was deadly still but for the
gentle splashing of the tame flamingoes paddling in the lily-pond.
suddenly the twinkling lantern of a night watchman appeared round the
corner of a cypress hedge. polynesia plucked at my stocking and, in an
impatient whisper, bade me hurry before our flight be discovered.

on our arrival at the beach we found the snail already feeling much
better and now able to move his tail without pain.

the porpoises (who are by nature inquisitive creatures) were still
hanging about in the offing to see if anything of interest was going to
happen. polynesia, the plotter, while the doctor was occupied with his
new patient, signaled to them and drew them aside for a little private
chat.

now see here, my friends, said she speaking low: you know how much
john dolittle has done for the animalsgiven his whole life up to them,
one might say. well, here is your chance to do something for him.
listen: he got made king of this island against his will, see? and now
that he has taken the job on, he feels that he cant leave itthinks
the indians wont be able to get along without him and all thatwhich
is nonsense, as you and i very well know. all right. then heres the
point: if this snail were only willing to take him and usand a little
baggagenot very much, thirty or forty pieces, sayinside his shell and
carry us to england, we feel sure that the doctor would go; because
hes just crazy to mess about on the floor of the ocean. whats more
this would be his one and only chance of escape from the island. now
it is highly important that the doctor return to his own country to
carry on his proper work which means such a lot to the animals of the
world. so what we want you to do is to tell the sea-urchin to tell the
starfish to tell the snail to take us in his shell and carry us to
puddleby river. is that plain?

[illustration: tiptoe incognito, whispered bumpo]

quite, quite, said the porpoises. and we will willingly do our very
best to persuade himfor it is, as you say, a perfect shame for the
great man to be wasting his time here when he is so much needed by the
animals.

and dont let the doctor know what youre about, said polynesia as
they started to move off. he might balk if he thought we had any hand
in it. get the snail to offer on his own account to take us. see?

john dolittle, unaware of anything save the work he was engaged on, was
standing knee-deep in the shallow water, helping the snail try out his
mended tail to see if it were well enough to travel on. bumpo and long
arrow, with chee-chee and jip, were lolling at the foot of a palm a
little way up the beach. polynesia and i now went and joined them.

half an hour passed.

what success the porpoises had met with, we did not know, till suddenly
the doctor left the snails side and came splashing out to us, quite
breathless.

what _do_ you think? he cried, while i was talking to the snail
just now he offered, of his own accord, to take us all back to england
inside his shell. he says he has got to go on a voyage of discovery
anyway, to hunt up a new home, now that the deep hole is closed. said
it wouldnt be much out of his way to drop us at puddleby river, if we
cared to come alonggoodness, what a chance! id love to go. to examine
the floor of the ocean all the way from brazil to europe! no man ever
did it before. what a glorious trip!oh that i had never allowed myself
to be made king! now i must see the chance of a lifetime slip by.

he turned from us and moved down the sands again to the middle beach,
gazing wistfully, longingly out at the snail. there was something
peculiarly sad and forlorn about him as he stood there on the lonely,
moonlit shore, the crown upon his head, his figure showing sharply
black against the glittering sea behind.

out of the darkness at my elbow polynesia rose and quietly moved down
to his side.

now doctor, said she in a soft persuasive voice as though she were
talking to a wayward child, you know this king business is not your
real work in life. these natives will be able to get along without
younot so well as they do with you of coursebut theyll managethe
same as they did before you came. nobody can say you havent done your
duty by them. it was their fault: they made you king. why not accept
the snails offer; and just drop everything now, and go? the work
youll do, the information youll carry home, will be of far more value
than what youre doing here.

good friend, said the doctor turning to her sadly, i cannot. they
would go back to their old unsanitary ways: bad water, uncooked fish,
no drainage, enteric fever and the rest.... no. i must think of their
health, their welfare. i began life as a peoples doctor: i seem to
have come back to it in the end. i cannot desert them. later perhaps
something will turn up. but i cannot leave them now.

thats where youre wrong, doctor, said she. now is when you should
go. nothing will turn up. the longer you stay, the harder it will be
to leavego now. go to-night.

what, steal away without even saying good-bye to them! why, polynesia,
what a thing to suggest!

a fat chance they would give you to say good-bye! snorted polynesia
growing impatient at last. i tell you, doctor, if you go back to that
palace tonight, for goodbys or anything else, you will stay there.
nowthis momentis the time for you to go.

the truth of the old parrots words seemed to be striking home; for
the doctor stood silent a minute, thinking.

but there are the note-books, he said presently: i would have to go
back to fetch them.

i have them here, doctor, said i, speaking upall of them.

again he pondered.

and long arrows collection, he said. i would have to take that also
with me.

it is here, oh kindly one, came the indians deep voice from the
shadow beneath the palm.

but what about provisions, asked the doctorfood for the journey?

we have a weeks supply with us, for our holiday, said
polynesiathats more than we will need.

for a third time the doctor was silent and thoughtful.

and then theres my hat, he said fretfully at last. that settles it:
ill _have_ to go back to the palace. i cant leave without my hat. how
could i appear in puddleby with this crown on my head?

here it is, doctor, said bumpo producing the hat, old, battered and
beloved, from under his coat.

polynesia had indeed thought of everything.

yet even now we could see the doctor was still trying to think up
further excuses.

oh kindly one, said long arrow, why tempt ill fortune? your way is
clear. your future and your work beckon you back to your foreign home
beyond the sea. with you will go also what lore i too have gathered
for mankindto lands where it will be of wider use than it can ever
here. i see the glimmerings of dawn in the eastern heaven. day is at
hand. go before your subjects are abroad. go before your project is
discovered. for truly i believe that if you go not now you will linger
the remainder of your days a captive king in popsipetel.

great decisions often take no more than a moment in the making. against
the now paling sky i saw the doctors figure suddenly stiffen. slowly
he lifted the sacred crown from off his head and laid it on the sands.

and when he spoke his voice was choked with tears.

they will find it here, he murmured, when they come to search for
me. and they will know that i have gone.... my children, my poor
children!i wonder will they ever understand why it was i left them....
i wonder will they ever understandand forgive.

he took his old hat from bumpo; then facing long arrow, gripped his
outstretched hand in silence.

you decide aright, oh kindly one, said the indianthough none
will miss and mourn you more than long arrow, the son of golden
arrowfarewell, and may good fortune ever lead you by the hand!

it was the first and only time i ever saw the doctor weep. without a
word to any of us, he turned and moved down the beach into the shallow
water of the sea.

the snail humped up its back and made an opening between its shoulders
and the edge of its shell. the doctor clambered up and passed within.
we followed him, after handing up the baggage. the opening shut tight
with a whistling suction noise.

then turning in the direction of the east, the great creature began
moving smoothly forward, down the slope into the deeper waters.

just as the swirling dark green surf was closing in above our heads,
the big morning sun popped his rim up over the edge of the ocean. and
through our transparent walls of pearl we saw the watery world about
us suddenly light up with that most wondrously colorful of visions, a
daybreak beneath the sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

the rest of the story of our homeward voyage is soon told.

our new quarters we found very satisfactory. inside the spacious shell,
the snails wide back was extremely comfortable to sit and lounge
onbetter than a sofa, when you once got accustomed to the damp and
clammy feeling of it. he asked us, shortly after we started, if we
wouldnt mind taking off our boots, as the hobnails in them hurt his
back as we ran excitedly from one side to another to see the different
sights.

the motion was not unpleasant, very smooth and even; in fact, but for
the landscape passing outside, you would not know, on the level going,
that you were moving at all.

i had always thought for some reason or other that the bottom of the
sea was flat. i found that it was just as irregular and changeful as
the surface of the dry land. we climbed over great mountain-ranges,
with peaks towering above peaks. we threaded our way through dense
forests of tall sea-plants. we crossed wide empty stretches of sandy
mud, like desertsso vast that you went on for a whole day with nothing
ahead of you but a dim horizon. sometimes the scene was moss-covered,
rolling country, green and restful to the eye like rich pastures; so
that you almost looked to see sheep cropping on these underwater downs.
and sometimes the snail would roll us forward inside him like peas,
when he suddenly dipped downward to descend into some deep secluded
valley with steeply sloping sides.

in these lower levels we often came upon the shadowy shapes of dead
ships, wrecked and sunk heaven only knows how many years ago; and
passing them we would speak in hushed whispers like children seeing
monuments in churches.

here too, in the deeper, darker waters, monstrous fishes, feeding
quietly in caves and hollows would suddenly spring up, alarmed at our
approach, and flash away into the gloom with the speed of an arrow.
while other bolder ones, all sorts of unearthly shapes and colors,
would come right up and peer in at us through the shell.

i suppose they think we are a sort of sanaquarium, said bumpoid
hate to be a fish.

it was a thrilling and ever-changing show. the doctor wrote or sketched
incessantly. before long we had filled all the blank note-books we had
left. then we searched our pockets for any odd scraps of paper on which
to jot down still more observations. we even went through the used
books a second time, writing in between the lines, scribbling all over
the covers, back and front.

our greatest difficulty was getting enough light to see by. in the
lower waters it was very dim. on the third day we passed a band of
fire-eels, a sort of large, marine glow-worm; and the doctor asked the
snail to get them to come with us for a way. this they did, swimming
alongside; and their light was very helpful, though not brilliant.

how our giant shellfish found his way across that vast and gloomy
world was a great puzzle to us. john dolittle asked him by what means
he navigatedhow he knew he was on the right road to puddleby river.
and what the snail said in reply got the doctor so excited, that having
no paper left, he tore out the lining of his precious hat and covered
it with notes.

by night of course it was impossible to see anything; and during the
hours of darkness the snail used to swim instead of crawl. when he did
so he could travel at a terrific speed, just by waggling that long tail
of his. this was the reason why we completed the trip in so short a
timefive and a half days.

the air of our chamber, not having a change in the whole voyage, got
very close and stuffy; and for the first two days we all had headaches.
but after that we got used to it and didnt mind it in the least.

early in the afternoon of the sixth day, we noticed we were climbing a
long gentle slope. as we went upward it grew lighter. finally we saw
that the snail had crawled right out of the water altogether and had
now come to a dead stop on a long strip of gray sand.

behind us we saw the surface of the sea rippled by the wind. on our
left was the mouth of a river with the tide running out. while in
front, the low flat land stretched away into the mistwhich prevented
one from seeing very far in any direction. a pair of wild ducks with
craning necks and whirring wings passed over us and disappeared like
shadows, seaward.

as a landscape, it was a great change from the hot brilliant sunshine
of popsipetel.

with the same whistling suction sound, the snail made the opening for
us to crawl out by. as we stepped down upon the marshy land we noticed
that a fine, drizzling autumn rain was falling.

can this be merrie england? asked bumpo, peering into the
fogdoesnt look like any place in particular. maybe the snail hasnt
brought us right after all.

yes, sighed polynesia, shaking the rain off her feathers, this is
england all rightyou can tell it by the beastly climate.

oh, but fellows, cried jip, as he sniffed up the air in great gulps,
it has a _smell_a good and glorious smell!excuse me a minute: i see
a water-rat.

sh!listen! said chee-chee through teeth that chattered with the
cold. theres puddleby church-clock striking four. why dont we divide
up the baggage and get moving. weve got a long way to foot it home
across the marshes.

lets hope, i put in, that dab-dab has a nice fire burning in the
kitchen.

im sure she will, said the doctor as he picked out his old handbag
from among the bundleswith this wind from the east shell need it to
keep the animals in the house warm. come on. lets hug the river-bank
so we dont miss our way in the fog. you know, theres something rather
attractive in the bad weather of englandwhen youve got a kitchen-fire
to look forward to.... four oclock! come alongwell just be in nice
time for tea.

[illustration: the end]

       *       *       *       *       *

transcribers notes:

varied hyphenation retained. obvious punctuation errors repaired.

page 20, he changed to be (dont be alarmed)

page 135, shellflsh changed to shellfish (of the shellfish)

page 137, way changed to may (come what may)

page 188, part four, _the first chapter_ made italic to match rest of
usage.

page 218, is changed to it (where it is)

page 249, musnt changed to mustnt (that he musnt give)

page 324, polnesia changed to polynesia (whispered polynesia)

page 347, thoroughy changed to thoroughly (thoroughly interested in)

page 357, poynesia changed to polynesia (said polynesiathats
more)





end of project gutenberg's the voyages of dr. dolittle, by hugh lofting

*** end of the project gutenberg ebook 1154 ***
