the project gutenberg ebook of the symposium
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: the symposium


author: xenophon

translator: henry graham dakyns

release date: january 1, 1998 [ebook #1181]
                most recently updated: september 16, 2008

language: english



*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the symposium ***



produced by john bickers





the symposium

by xenophon

translation by h. g. dakyns




          xenophon the athenian was born 431 b.c. he was a
          pupil of socrates. he marched with the spartans,
          and was exiled from athens. sparta gave him land
          and property in scillus, where he lived for many
          years before having to move once more, to settle
          in corinth. he died in 354 b.c.

          the symposium records the discussion of socrates
          and company at a dinner given by callias for the
          youth autolycus. dakyns believed that plato knew
          of this work, and that it influenced him to some
          degree when he wrote his own "symposium."




     preparer's note

     this was typed from dakyns' series, "the works of xenophon," a
     four-volume set. the complete list of xenophon's works (though
     there is doubt about some of these) is:

     work                                   number of books

     the anabasis                                         7
     the hellenica                                        7
     the cyropaedia                                       8
     the memorabilia                                      4
     the symposium                                        1
     the economist                                        1
     on horsemanship                                      1
     the sportsman                                        1
     the cavalry general                                  1
     the apology                                          1
     on revenues                                          1
     the hiero                                            1
     the agesilaus                                        1
     the polity of the athenians and the lacedaemonians   2

     text in brackets "{}" is my transliteration of greek text into
     english using an oxford english dictionary alphabet table. the
     diacritical marks have been lost.




the symposium

or

the banquet



i

for myself, (1) i hold to the opinion that not alone are the serious
transactions of "good and noble men" (2) most memorable, but that words
and deeds distinctive of their lighter moods may claim some record. (3)
in proof of which contention, i will here describe a set of incidents
within the scope of my experience. (4)

 (1) see aristid. ii. foll.

 (2) or, "nature's noblemen."

 (3) cf. plut. "ages." 29 (clough, iv. 35): "and indeed if, as xenophon
    says, in conversation good men, even in their sports and at their
    wine, let fall many sayings that are worth preserving." see grote,
    "plato," ii. 228 foll. as to the sportive character of the work.

 (4) or, "let me describe a scene which i was witness of." see hug.
    "plat. symp." p. xv. foll.

the occasion was a horse-race (5) at the great panathenaic festival. (6)
callias, (7) the son of hipponicus, being a friend and lover of the
boy autolycus, (8) had brought the lad, himself the winner of the
pankration, (9) to see the spectacle.

 (5) see "hipparch," ii. 1.

 (6) "held towards the end of july (hecatombaeon) every year, and with
    greater pomp every four years (the third of each olympiad)."--gow,
    84, 129, n.

 (7) callias. cobet, "pros. x." p. 67 foll.; boeckh, "p. e. a." p. 481.

 (8) see cobet, op. cit. p. 54; plut. "lysand." 15 (clough, iii. 120);
    grote, "h. g." ix. 261.

 (9) 420 b.c., al. 421. the date is fixed by the "autolycus" of
    eupolis. see athen. v. 216. for the pankration, which comprised
    wrestling and boxing, see aristot. "rhet." i. s. 14.

as soon as the horse race was over, (10) callias proceeded to escort
autolycus and his father, lycon, to his house in the piraeus, being
attended also by niceratus. (11) but catching sight of socrates along
with certain others (critobulus, (12) hermogenes, antisthenes, and
charmides), he bade an attendant conduct the party with autolycus,
whilst he himself approached the group, exclaiming:

 (10) see a. martin, op. cit. p. 265.

 (11) niceratus. see cobet, op. cit. 71; boeckh, "p. e. a." 480; plat.
    "lach." 200 c; "hell." ii. iii. 39; lys. xviii.; diod. xiv. 5.

 (12) critobulus, hermogenes, antisthenes, charmides. see "mem."

a happy chance brings me across your path, just when i am about to
entertain autolycus and his father at a feast. the splendour of the
entertainment shall be much enhanced, i need not tell you, if my hall
(13) should happily be graced by worthies like yourselves, who have
attained to purity of soul, (14) rather than by generals and cavalry
commanders (15) and a crowd of place-hunters. (16)

 (13) or, "dining-room." see becker, "charicles," 265.

 (14) see grote, "h. g." viii. 619 foll. cf. plat. "rep." 527 d;
    "soph." 230 e.

 (15) lit. strategoi, hipparchs.

 (16) or, "petitioners for offices of state." reading {spoudarkhiais}.

whereat socrates: when will you have done with your gibes, callias? why,
because you have yourself spent sums of money on protagoras, (17) and
gorgias, and prodicus, and a host of others, to learn wisdom, must you
pour contempt on us poor fellows, who are but self-taught tinkers (18)
in philosophy compared with you?

 (17) as to protagoras of abdera, gorgias of leontini, prodicus of
    ceos, see plat. "prot." 314 c, "rep." x. 600 c, "apol." 19 e;
    "anab." ii. vi. 17; "mem." ii. i. 21; "encyc. brit." "sophists,"
    h. jackson.

 (18) or, "hand-to-mouth cultivators of philosophy," "roturiers." cf.
    plat. "rep." 565 a: "a third class who work for themselves"; thuc.
    i. 141: "the peloponnesians cultivate their own soil, and they
    have no wealth either public or private." cf. "econ." v. 4.

hitherto, no doubt (retorted callias), although i had plenty of wise
things to say, i have kept my wisdom to myself; but if only you will
honour me with your company to-day, i promise to present myself in quite
another light; you will see i am a person of no mean consideration after
all. (19)

 (19) or, "i will prove to you that i am worthy of infinite respect."

socrates and the others, while thanking callias politely for the
invitation, were not disposed at first to join the dinner party; but the
annoyance of the other so to be put off was so obvious that in the end
the party were persuaded to accompany their host.

after an interval devoted to gymnastic exercise (and subsequent
anointing of the limbs) by some, whilst others of them took a bath, the
guests were severally presented to the master of the house.

autolycus was seated next his father, as was natural, (20) while the
rest reclined on couches. noting the scene presented, the first idea to
strike the mind of any one must certainly have been that beauty has
by nature something regal in it; and the more so, if it chance to
be combined (as now in the person of autolycus) with modesty and
self-respect. even as when a splendid object blazes forth at night, the
eyes of men are riveted, (21) so now the beauty of autolycus drew on him
the gaze of all; nor was there one of those onlookers but was stirred
to his soul's depth by him who sat there. (22) some fell into unwonted
silence, while the gestures of the rest were equally significant.

 (20) al. "autolycus found a seat beside his father, while the rest
    reclined on couches in the usual fashion." see schneider's note.

 (21) passage imitated by max. tyr. "or." xxiv. 4.

 (22) cf. plat. "charm." 154.

it seems the look betokening divine possession, no matter who the god,
must ever be remarkable. only, whilst the subject of each commoner
emotion passion-whirled may be distinguished by flashings of the eye, by
terror-striking tones of voice, and by the vehement fervour of the man's
whole being, so he who is inspired by temperate and harmonious love (23)
will wear a look of kindlier welcome in his eyes; the words he utters
fall from his lips with softer intonation; and every gesture of his
bodily frame conform to what is truly frank and liberal. such, at any
rate, the strange effects now wrought on callias by love. he was like
one transformed, the cynosure of all initiated in the mysteries of this
divinity. (24)

 (23) cf. plat. "rep." iii. 403 a: "whereas true love is a love of
    beauty and order, temperate and harmonious."

 (24) cf. "econ." xxi. 12.

so they supped in silence, the whole company, as if an injunction had
been laid upon them by some superior power. but presently there came
a knocking on the door! philippus the jester bade the doorkeeper (25)
announce him, with apologies for seeking a night's lodging: (26) he had
come, he said, provided with all necessaries for dining, at a friend's
expense: his attendant was much galled with carrying, nothing but an
empty bread-basket. (27) to this announcement callias, appealing to his
guests, replied: "it would never do to begrudge the shelter of one's
roof: (28) let him come in." and as he spoke, he glanced across to where
autolycus was seated, as if to say: "i wonder how you take the jest."

 (25) lit. "him who answers the knock," "the concierge" or hall-porter.
    cf. theophr. "char." xiv. 7; aristot. "oec." i. 6.

 (26) lit. "and why he wished to put up."

 (27) lit. "and being breakfastless"; cf. theocr. i. 51. the jester's
    humour resembles pistol's ("merry wives," i. 3. 23) "o base
    hungarian wight!"

 (28) or, "how say you, my friends, it would hardly do, methinks, to
    shut the door upon him." see becker, "charicles," p. 92.

meanwhile the jester, standing at the door of the apartment where the
feast was spread, addressed the company:

i believe you know, sirs, that being a jester by profession, it is my
business to make jokes. i am all the readier, therefore, to present
myself, feeling convinced it is a better joke to come to dinner thus
unbidden than by solemn invitation.

be seated, (29) then (replied the host). the company are fully fed on
serious thoughts, you see, if somewhat starved of food for laughter.

 (29) lit. "pray, find a couch then."

the feast proceeded; and, if only to discharge the duty laid upon him at
a dinner-party, philippus must try at once to perpetrate a jest. failing
to stir a smile, poor fellow, he made no secret of his perturbation.
presently he tried again; and for the second time the joke fell flat.
whereat he paused abruptly in the middle of the course, and muffling up
his face, fell prostrate on the couch.

then callias: what ails you, sirrah? have you the cramp? the toothache?
what?

to which the other heaving a deep groan: yes, callias, an atrocious
ache; since laughter has died out among mankind, my whole estate is
bankrupt. (30) in old days i would be asked to dinner to amuse the
company with jests. (31) now all is changed, and who will be at pains to
ask me out to dinner any more? i might as well pretend to be immortal
as to be serious. nor will any one invite me in hopes of reclining at
my board in his turn. everyone knows so serious a thing as dinner in my
house was never heard of; it's against the rules--the more's the pity.

 (30) cf. "cyrop." vi. i. 3; plat. "laws," 677 c.

 (31) lit. "by the laughter which i stirred in them."

and as he spoke he blew his nose and snuffled, uttering the while so
truly dolorous a moan (32) that everybody fell to soothing him. "they
would all laugh again another day," they said, and so implored him
to have done and eat his dinner; till critobulus could not stand his
lamentation longer, but broke into a peal of laughter. the welcome sound
sufficed. the sufferer unveiled his face, and thus addressed his inner
self: (33) "be of good cheer, my soul, there are many battles (34) yet
in store for us," and so he fell to discussing the viands once again.

 (32) philippus would seem to have anticipated mr. woodward; see
    prologue to "she stoops to conquer":

pray, would you know the reason i'm crying? the comic muse long sick is
now a-dying! and if she goes...


 (33) cf. "cyrop." i. iv. 13; eur. "med." 1056, 1242; aristoph. "ach."
    357, 480.

 (34) or add, "ere we have expended our last shot." philippus puns on
    the double sense of {sumbolai}. cf. aristoph. "ach." 1210, where
    lamachus groans {talas ego xumboles bareias}, and dicaeopolis
    replies {tois khousi gar tis xumbolas epratteto}.

lam. 'twas at the final charge; i'd paid before
   a number of the rogues; at least a score.

dic. it was a most expensive charge you bore:
   poor lamachus! he was forced to pay the score.

h. frere.



ii

now the tables were removed, and in due order they had poured out the
libation, and had sung the hymn. (1) to promote the revelry, there
entered now a syracusan, with a trio of assistants: the first, a
flute-girl, perfect in her art; and next, a dancing-girl, skilled to
perform all kinds of wonders; lastly, in the bloom of beauty, a boy,
who played the harp and danced with infinite grace. this syracusan went
about exhibiting his troupe, whose wonderful performance was a source of
income to him.

 (1) see plat. "symp." 176 a; athen. ix. 408.

after the girl had played to them upon the flute, and then the boy in
turn upon the harp, and both performers, as it would appear, had set the
hearts of every one rejoicing, socrates turned to callias:

a feast, upon my word, o princeliest entertainer! (2) was it not enough
to set before your guests a faultless dinner, but you must feast our
eyes and ears on sights and sounds the most delicious?

 (2) lit. "in consummate style."

to which the host: and that reminds me, a supply of unguents might not
be amiss; (3) what say you? shall we feast on perfumes also? (4)

 (3) lit. "suppose i tell the servant to bring in some perfumes, so
    that we may further feast on fragrance..." cf. theophr. "char."
    vii. 6 (jebb ad loc.)

 (4) see athen. xv. 686.

no, i protest (the other answered). scents resemble clothes. one dress
is beautiful on man and one on woman; and so with fragrance: what
becomes the woman, ill becomes the man. did ever man anoint himself with
oil of myrrh to please his fellow? women, and especially young women
(like our two friends' brides, niceratus' and critobulus'), need no
perfume, being but compounds themselves of fragrance. (5) no, sweeter
than any perfume else to women is good olive-oil, suggestive of the
training-school: (6) sweet if present, and when absent longed for. and
why? distinctions vanish with the use of perfumes. the freeman and the
slave have forthwith both alike one odour. but the scents derived from
toils--those toils which every free man loves (7)--need customary habit
first, and time's distillery, if they are to be sweet with freedom's
breath, at last. (8)

 (5) cf. solomon's song, iv. 10: "how fair is thy love, my sister, my
    spouse! how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell of
    thine ointments than all spices!"

 (6) lit. "the gymnasium."

 (7) cf. aristoph. "clouds," 1002 foll. see j. a. symonds, "the greek
    poets," 1st s., p. 281.

 (8) see "mem." iii. x. 5; "cyrop." viii. i. 43.

here lycon interposed: that may be well enough for youths, but what
shall we do whose gymnastic days are over? what fragrance is left for
us?

soc. why, that of true nobility, of course.

lyc. and whence shall a man obtain this chrism?

soc. not from those that sell perfumes and unguents, in good sooth.

lyc. but whence, then?

soc. theognis has told us:

    from the good thou shalt learn good things, but if with the evil
    thou holdest converse, thou shalt lose the wit that is in thee. (9)

 (9) theog. 35 foll. see "mem." i. ii. 20; plat. "men." 95 d.

lyc. (turning to his son). do you hear that, my son?

that he does (socrates answered for the boy), and he puts the precept
into practice also; to judge, at any rate, from his behaviour. when he
had set his heart on carrying off the palm of victory in the pankration,
he took you into his counsel; (10) and will again take counsel to
discover the fittest friend to aid him in his high endeavour, (11) and
with this friend associate.

 (10) it looks as if something had been lost intimating that autolycus
    would have need of some one to instruct him in spiritual things.
    for attempts to fill up the lacuna see schenkl.

 (11) or, "these high pursuits."

thereupon several of the company exclaimed at once. "where will he find
a teacher to instruct him in that wisdom?" one inquired. "why, it is not
to be taught!" exclaimed another; to which a third rejoined: "why should
it not be learnt as well as other things?" (12)

 (12) cf. for the question {ei arete didakton}, "mem." i. ii. 19; iv.
    i; "cyrop." iii. i. 17; iii. iii. 53.

then socrates: the question would seem at any rate to be debatable.
suppose we defer it till another time, and for the present not interrupt
the programme of proceedings. i see, the dancing-girl is standing ready;
they are handing her some hoops.

and at the instant her fellow with the flute commenced a tune to keep
her company, whilst some one posted at her side kept handing her the
hoops till she had twelve in all. with these in her hands she fell
to dancing, and the while she danced she flung the hoops into the
air--overhead she sent them twirling--judging the height they must be
thrown to catch them, as they fell, in perfect time. (13)

 (13) "in time with the music and the measure of the dance."

then socrates: the girl's performance is one proof among a host of
others, sirs, that woman's nature is nowise inferior to man's. all she
wants is strength and judgment; (14) and that should be an encouragement
to those of you who have wives, to teach them whatever you would have
them know as your associates. (15)

 (14) reading, as vulg. {gnomes de kai iskhuos deitai}; al. continuing
    {ouden} from the first half of the sentence, transl. "she has no
    lack of either judgment or physical strength." lange conj. {romes}
    for {gnomes}, "all she needs is force and strength of body." see
    newman, op. cit. i. 419.

 (15) lit. "so that, if any of you has a wife, he may well take heart
    and teach her whatever he would wish her to know in dealing with
    her." cf. "n. a." i. 17.

antisthenes rejoined: if that is your conclusion, socrates, why do you
not tutor your own wife, xanthippe, (16) instead of letting her (17)
remain, of all the wives that are, indeed that ever will be, i imagine,
the most shrewish?

 (16) see cobet, "pros. xen." p. 56; "mem." ii. ii. 1; aul. gell. "n.
    a." i. 17.

 (17) lit. "dealing with her," "finding in her"; {khro} corresponding
    to {khresthai} in socrates' remarks.

well now, i will tell you (he answered). i follow the example of
the rider who wishes to become an expert horseman: "none of your
soft-mouthed, docile animals for me," he says; "the horse for me to own
must show some spirit": (18) in the belief, no doubt, if he can manage
such an animal, it will be easy enough to deal with every other horse
besides. and that is just my case. i wish to deal with human beings, to
associate with man in general; hence my choice of wife. (19) i know full
well, if i can tolerate her spirit, i can with ease attach myself to
every human being else.

 (18) lit. "because i see the man who aims at skill in horsemanship
    does not care to own a soft-mouthed, docile animal, but some
    restive, fiery creature."

 (19) lit. "being anxious to have intercourse with all mankind, to deal
    with every sort of human being, i possess my wife."

a well-aimed argument, not wide of the mark by any means! (20) the
company were thinking.

 (20) cf. plat. "theaet." 179 c.

hereupon a large hoop studded with a bristling row of upright swords
(21) was introduced; and into the centre of this ring of knives and
out of it again the girl threw somersaults backwards, forwards, several
times, till the spectators were in terror of some accident; but with the
utmost coolness and without mishap the girl completed her performance.

 (21) see becker, "char." p. 101. cf. plat. "symp." 190; "euthyd." 294.

here socrates, appealing to antisthenes: none of the present company,
i take it, who have watched this spectacle will ever again deny that
courage can be taught, (22) when the girl there, woman should she be,
rushes so boldly into the midst of swords.

 (22) cf. "mem." iii. ix. 1.

he, thus challenged, answered: no; and what our friend, the syracusan
here, should do is to exhibit his dancing-girl to the state. (23) let
him tell the authorities he is prepared, for a consideration, to give
the whole athenian people courage to face the hostile lances at close
quarters.

 (23) or, "to the city," i.e. of athens.

whereat the jester: an excellent idea, upon my word; and when it
happens, may i be there to see that mighty orator (24) peisander
learning to throw somersaults (25) into swords; since incapacity to
look a row of lances in the face at present makes him shy of military
service. (26)

 (24) or, "tribune of the people." cf. plat. "gorg." 520 b; "laws," 908
    d.

 (25) or, "learning to go head over heels into swords."

 (26) for peisander see cobet, "pros. xen." p. 46 foll. a thoroughgoing
    oligarch (thuc. viii. 90), he was the occasion of much mirth to
    the comic writers (so grote, "h. g." viii. 12). see re his "want
    of spirit" aristoph. "birds," 1556:

{entha kai peisandros elthe deomenos psukhen idein, e zont ekeinon
proulipe, k.t.l.}

    where the poet has a fling at socrates also:

socrates beside the brink, summons from the murky sink many a
disembodied ghost; and peisander reached the coast to raise the spirit
that he lost; with conviction strange and new, a gawky camel which he
slew, like ulysses.--whereupon, etc.

h. frere

    cf. "peace," 395; "lysistr." 490.

at this stage of the proceedings the boy danced.

the dance being over, socrates exclaimed: pray, did you notice how the
beauty of the child, so lovely in repose, became enhanced with every
movement of his supple body?

to which charmides replied: how like a flatterer you are! one would
think you had set yourself to puff the dancing-master. (27)

 (27) see "the critic," i. ii.

to be sure (he answered solemnly); and there's another point i could
not help observing: how while he danced no portion of his body remained
idle; neck and legs and hands together, one and all were exercised. (28)
that is how a man should dance, who wants to keep his body light and
healthy. (29) (then turning to the syracusan, he added): i cannot say
how much obliged i should be to you, o man of syracuse, for lessons in
deportment. pray teach me my steps. (30)

 (28) cf. "pol. lac." v. 9.

 (29) cf. aristot. "h. a." vi. 21. 4.

 (30) "gestures," "postures," "figures." see eur. "cycl." 221;
    aristoph. "peace," 323; isocr. "antid." 183.

and what use will you make of them? (the other asked).

god bless me! i shall dance, of course (he answered).

the remark was greeted with a peal of merriment.

then socrates, with a most serious expression of countenance: (31)
you are pleased to laugh at me. pray, do you find it so ridiculous
my wishing to improve my health by exercise? or to enjoy my victuals
better? to sleep better? or is it the sort of exercise i set my heart
on? not like those runners of the long race, (32) to have my legs
grow muscular and my shoulders leaner in proportion; nor like a boxer,
thickening chest and shoulders at expense of legs; but by distribution
of the toil throughout my limbs (33) i seek to give an even balance to
my body. or are you laughing to think that i shall not in future have
to seek a partner in the training school, (34) whereby it will not be
necessary for an old man like myself to strip in public? (35) all i
shall need will be a seven-sofa'd chamber, (36) where i can warm to
work, (37) just like the lad here who has found this room quite ample
for the purpose. and in winter i shall do gymnastics (38) under cover,
or when the weather is broiling under shade.... but what is it you keep
on laughing at--the wish on my part to reduce to moderate size a paunch
a trifle too rotund? is that the source of merriment? (39) perhaps you
are not aware, my friends, that charmides--yes! he there--caught me only
the other morning in the act of dancing?

 (31) "bearing a weighty and serious brow."

 (32) "like your runner of the mile race." cf. plat. "prot." 335 e.

 (33) or, "resolute exercise of the whole body." see aristot. "pol."
    viii. 4. 9; "rhet." i. 5. 14.

 (34) or, "be dependent on a fellow-gymnast." "pol. lac." ix. 5; plat.
    "soph." 218 b; "laws," 830 b; "symp." 217 b, c.

 (35) or, "to strip in public when my hair turns gray." socrates was
    (421 b.c.) about 50, but is pictured, i think, as an oldish man.

 (36) see aristot. "h. a." ix. 45. 1; "econ." viii. 13.

 (37) passage referred to by diog. laert. ii. 5. 15; lucian, "de salt."
    25; plut. "praec. san." 496.

 (38) "take my exercise."

 (39) zeune cf. max. tyr. "diss." vii. 9; xxxix. 5.

yes, that i will swear to (the other answered), and at first i stood
aghast, i feared me you had parted with your senses; but when i heard
your explanation, pretty much what you have just now told us, i went
home and--i will not say, began to dance myself (it is an accomplishment
i have not been taught as yet), but i fell to sparring, (40) an art of
which i have a very pretty knowledge.

 (40) "sparring," etc., an art which quintil. "inst. or." i. 11, 17,
    attributes to socrates. cf. herod. vi. 129 concerning
    hippocleides; and rich, "dict. of antiq." s.v. "chironomia."

that's true, upon my life! (exclaimed the jester). one needs but look at
you to see there's not a dram of difference between legs and shoulders.
(41) i'll be bound, if both were weighed in the scales apart, like "tops
and bottoms," the clerks of the market (42) would let you off scot-free.

 (41) lit. "your legs are equal in weight with your shoulders." cf.
    "od." xviii. 373, {elikes... isophoroi boes}, "of equal age and
    force to bear the yoke."--butcher and lang.

 (42) see boeckh, "public economy of athens," p. 48; aristoph.
    "acharn." 723; lys. 165, 34.

then callias: o socrates, do please invite me when you begin your
dancing lessons. i will be your vis-a-vis, (43) and take lessons with
you.

 (43) cf. "anab." v. iv. 12.

come on (the jester shouted), give us a tune upon the pipe, and let me
show you how to dance.

so saying up he got, and mimicked the dances of the boy and girl in
burlesque fashion, and inasmuch as the spectators had been pleased to
think the natural beauty of the boy enhanced by every gesture of his
body in the dance, so the jester must give a counter-representation,
(44) in which each twist and movement of his body was a comical
exaggeration of nature.

 (44) reading {antepedeizen}. cf. plat. "theaet." 162 b; "ages." i. 12;
    if vulg. {antapedeizen}, transl. "would prove per contra each
    bend," etc. cf. aristot. "rhet." ii. 26. 3.

and since the girl had bent herself backwards and backwards, till she
was nearly doubled into the form of a hoop, so he must try to imitate a
hoop by stooping forwards and ducking down his head.

and as finally, the boy had won a round of plaudits for the manner in
which he kept each muscle of the body in full exercise whilst dancing,
so now the jester, bidding the flute-girl quicken the time (presto!
presto! prestissimo!), fell to capering madly, tossing legs and arms
and head together, until he was fairly tired out, and threw himself dead
beat upon the sofa, gasping:

there, that's a proof that my jigs too are splendid exercise; at any
rate, i am dying of thirst; let the attendant kindly fill me the mighty
goblet. (45)

 (45) cf. plat. "symp." 223 c.

quite right (said callias), and we will pledge you. our throats are
parched with laughing at you.

at this point socrates: nay, gentlemen, if drinking is the order of the
day, i heartily approve. wine it is in very truth that moistens the soul
of man, (46) that lulls at once all cares to sleep, even as mandragora
(47) drugs our human senses, and at the same time kindles light-hearted
thoughts, (48) as oil a flame. yet it fares with the banquets of men,
(49) if i mistake not, precisely as with plants that spring and shoot
on earth. when god gives these vegetable growths too full a draught
of rain, they cannot lift their heads nor feel the light air breathe
through them; but if they drink in only the glad supply they need, they
stand erect, they shoot apace, and reach maturity of fruitage. so we,
too, if we drench our throats with over-copious draughts, (50) ere long
may find our legs begin to reel and our thoughts begin to falter; (51)
we shall scarce be able to draw breath, much less to speak a word in
season. but if (to borrow language from the mint of gorgias (52)), if
only the attendants will bedew us with a frequent mizzle (53) of small
glasses, we shall not be violently driven on by wine to drunkenness, but
with sweet seduction reach the goal of sportive levity.

 (46) cf. plat. "laws," 649; aristoph. "knights," 96:

come, quick now, bring me a lusty stoup of wine, to moisten my
understanding and inspire me (h. frere).

 (47) cf. plat. "rep." vi. 488 c; dem. "phil." iv. 133. 1; lucian v.,
    "tim." 2; lxxiii., "dem. enc." 36. see "othello," iii. 3. 330:

not poppy, nor mandragora, nor all the drowsy syrups of the world;

    "antony and cl." i. 5, 4.

 (48) cf. 1 esdras iii. 20: "it turneth also every thought into jollity
    and mirth," {eis euokhian kai euphrosunen}. the whole passage is
    quoted by athen. 504. stob. "fl." lvi. 17.

 (49) reading {sumposia}, cf. theog. 298, 496; or if after athen.
    {somata} transl. "persons."

 (50) or, "if we swallow at a gulp the liquor." cf. plat. "sym." 176 d.

 (51) see "cyrop." i. iii. 10, viii. viii. 10; aristoph. "wasps," 1324;
    "pol. lac." v. 7.

 (52) for phrases filed by gorgias, see aristot. "rhet." iii. 3;
    "faults of taste in the use of metaphors," longin. "de subl." 3.
    see also plat. "symp." 198 c.

 (53) cf. aristoph. "peace," 1141; theophr. "lap." 13; lucian, xvii.,
    "de merc. cond." 27; cic. "cat. m." 14, transl. "pocula...
    minuta atque rorantia."

the proposition was unanimously carried, with a rider appended by
philippus: the cup-bearers should imitate good charioteers, and push the
cups round, quickening the pace each circuit. (54)

 (54) or, "at something faster than a hand-gallop each round." see the
    drinking song in "antony and cl." i. 7. 120.



iii

during this interval, whilst the cup-bearers carried out their duties,
the boy played on the lyre tuned to accompany the flute, and sang. (1)

 (1) cf. plat. "laws," 812 c; aristot. "poet." i. 4.

the performance won the plaudits of the company, and drew from charmides
a speech as follows: sirs, what socrates was claiming in behalf of wine
applies in my opinion no less aptly to the present composition. so
rare a blending of boyish and of girlish beauty, and of voice with
instrument, is potent to lull sorrow to sleep, and to kindle aphrodite's
flame.

then socrates, reverting in a manner to the charge: the young people
have fully proved their power to give us pleasure. yet, charming as they
are, we still regard ourselves, no doubt, as much their betters. what
a shame to think that we should here be met together, and yet make no
effort ourselves to heighten the festivity! (2)

 (2) see plat. "prot." 347 d; "a company like this of ours, and men
    such as we profess to be, do not require the help of another's
    voice," etc.--jowett. cf. id. "symp." 176: "to-day let us have
    conversation instead; and if you will allow me, i will tell you
    what sort of conversation."

several of the company exclaimed at once: be our director then yourself.
explain what style of talk we should engage in to achieve that object.
(3)

 (3) {exegou}. "prescribe the form of words we must lay hold of to
    achieve the object, and we will set to work, arch-casuist."

nothing (he replied) would please me better than to demand of callias
a prompt performance of his promise. he told us, you recollect, if we
would dine with him, he would give us an exhibition of his wisdom.

to which challenge callias: that i will readily, but you on your side,
one and all, must propound some virtue of which you claim to have the
knowledge.

socrates replied: at any rate, not one of us will have the least
objection to declaring what particular thing he claims to know as best
worth having.

agreed (proceeded callias); and for my part i proclaim at once what i
am proudest of. my firm belief is, i have got the gift to make my
fellow-mortals better.

make men better! (cried antisthenes); and pray how? by teaching them
some base mechanic art? or teaching them nobility of soul? (4)

 (4) or, "beauty and nobility of soul" ({kalokagathia}). see "mem." i.
    vi. 14.

the latter (he replied), if justice (5) be synonymous with that high
type of virtue.

 (5) i.e. "social uprightness."

of course it is (rejoined antisthenes) the most indisputable specimen.
since, look you, courage and wisdom may at times be found calamitous to
friends or country, (6) but justice has no single point in common with
injustice, right and wrong cannot commingle. (7)

 (6) see "mem." iv. ii. 33.

 (7) i.e. "the one excludes the other."

well then (proceeded callias), as soon (8) as every one has stated his
peculiar merit, (9) i will make no bones of letting you into my secret.
you shall learn the art by which i consummate my noble end. (10) so
now, niceratus, suppose you tell us on what knowledge you most pride
yourself.

 (8) reading {emon}. al. {umon}, "when you others."

 (9) lit. "what he has for which to claim utility."

 (10) or, "give the work completeness." cf. plat. "charm." 173 a;
    "gorg." 454 a.

he answered: my father, (11) in his pains to make me a good man,
compelled me to learn the whole of homer's poems, and it so happens that
even now i can repeat the "iliad" and the "odyssey" by heart. (12)

 (11) nicias.

 (12) of, "off-hand." see "mem." iii. vi. 9; plat. "theaet." 142 d.

you have not forgotten (interposed antisthenes), perhaps, that besides
yourself there is not a rhapsodist who does not know these epics?

forgotten! is it likely (he replied), considering i had to listen to
them almost daily?

ant. and did you ever come across a sillier tribe of people than these
same rhapsodists? (13)

 (13) cf. "mem." iv. ii. 10.

nic. not i, indeed. don't ask me to defend their wits.

it is plain (suggested socrates), they do not know the underlying
meaning. (14) but you, niceratus, have paid large sums of money to
anaximander, and stesimbrotus, and many others, (15) so that no single
point in all that costly lore is lost upon you. (16) but what (he added,
turning to critobulus) do you most pride yourself upon?

 (14) i.e. "they haven't the key (of knowledge) to the allegorical or
    spiritual meaning of the sacred text." cf. plat. "crat." 407;
    "ion," 534; "rep." 378, 387; "theaet." 180; "prot." 316. see
    grote, "h. g." i. 564.

 (15) see aristot. "rhet." iii. 11, 13. "or we may describe niceratus
     (not improbably our friend) as a 'philoctetes stung by pratys,'
    using the simile of thrasymachus when he saw niceratus after his
    defeat by pratys in the rhapsody with his hair still dishevelled
    and his face unwashed."--welldon. as to stesimbrotus, see plat.
    "ion," 530: "ion. very true, socrates; interpretation has
    certainly been the most laborious part of my art; and i believe
    myself able to speak about homer better than any man; and that
    neither metrodorus of lampsacus, nor stesimbrotus of thasos, nor
    glaucon, nor any one else who ever was, had as good ideas about
    homer, or as many of them, as i have."--jowett. anaximander,
    probably of lampsacus, the author of a {'erologia}; see cobet,
    "pros. xen." p. 8.

 (16) or, "you will not have forgotten one point of all that precious
    teaching." like sir john falstaff's page (2 "henry iv." ii. 2.
    100), niceratus, no doubt, has got many "a crown's worth of good
    interpretations."

on beauty (answered critobulus).

what (socrates rejoined), shall you be able to maintain that by your
beauty you can make us better?

crit. that will i, or prove myself a shabby sort of person.

soc. well, and what is it you pride yourself upon, antisthenes?

on wealth (he answered).

whereupon hermogenes inquired: had he then a large amount of money? (17)

 (17) i.e. "out at interest," or, "in the funds," as we should say.

not one sixpence: (18) that i swear to you (he answered).

 (18) lit. "not an obol" = "a threepenny bit," circa.

herm. then you possess large property in land?

ant. enough, i daresay, for the youngster there, autolycus, to dust
himself withal. (19)

 (19) i.e. "to sprinkle himself with sand, after anointing." cf.
    lucian, xxxviii., "amor." 45.

well, we will lend you our ears, when your turn comes (exclaimed the
others).

soc. and do you now tell us, charmides, on what you pride yourself.

oh, i, for my part, pride myself on poverty (he answered).

upon my word, a charming business! (exclaimed socrates). poverty! of
all things the least liable to envy; seldom, if ever, an object of
contention; (20) never guarded, yet always safe; the more you starve it,
the stronger it grows.

 (20) cf. plat. "rep." 521 a; "laws," 678 c.

and you, socrates, yourself (their host demanded), what is it you pride
yourself upon?

then he, with knitted brows, quite solemnly: on pandering. (21) and
when they laughed to hear him say this, (22) he continued: laugh to your
hearts content, my friends; but i am certain i could make a fortune, if
i chose to practise this same art.

 (21) or, more politely, "on playing the go-between." see grote, "h.
    g." viii. 457, on the "extremely aristophanic" character of the
    "symposium" of xenophon.

 (22) "him, the master, thus declare himself."

at this point lycon, turning to philippus: we need not ask you what you
take the chiefest pride in. what can it be, you laughter-making man,
except to set folk laughing?

yes (he answered), and with better right, i fancy, than callippides,
(23) the actor, who struts and gives himself such pompous airs, to think
that he alone can set the crowds a-weeping in the theatre. (24)

 (23) for illustrative tales about him see plut. "ages." xxi.; "alcib."
    xxxii.; polyaen. vi. 10. cf. "hell." iv. viii. 16.

 (24) or, "set for their sins a-weeping."

and now you, lycon, tell us, won't you (asked antisthenes), what it is
you take the greatest pride in?

you all of you, i fancy, know already what that is (the father
answered); it is in my son here.

and the lad himself (some one suggested) doubtless prides himself,
beyond all else, on having won the prize of victory.

at that autolycus (and as he spoke he blushed) answered for himself:
(25) no indeed, not i.

 (25) cf. plat. "charm." 158 c.

the company were charmed to hear him speak, and turned and looked; and
some one asked: on what is it then, autolycus?

to which he answered: on my father (and leaned closer towards him).

at which sight callias, turning to the father: do you know you are the
richest man in the whole world, lycon?

to which lycon: really, i was not aware of that before.

then callias: why then, it has escaped you that you would refuse the
whole of persia's wealth, (26) in exchange for your own son.

 (26) lit. "of the great king." cf. "cyrop." viii. iii. 26.

most true (he answered), i plead guilty; here and now i am convicted
(27) of being the wealthiest man in all the world!

 (27) "caught flagrante delicto. i do admit i do out-croesus croesus."

and you, hermogenes, on what do you plume yourself most highly? (asked
niceratus).

on the virtue and the power of my friends (he answered), and that being
what they are, they care for me.

at this remark they turned their eyes upon the speaker, and several
spoke together, asking: will you make them known to us?

i shall be very happy (he replied).



iv

at this point, socrates took up the conversation: it now devolves on us
to prove in turn that what we each have undertaken to defend is really
valuable.

then callias: be pleased to listen to me first: my case is this, that
while the rest of you go on debating what justice and uprightness are,
(1) i spend my time in making men more just and upright.

 (1) {to to dikaion}; cf. "mem." iv. iv.

soc. and how do you do that, good sir?

call. by giving money, to be sure.

antisthenes sprang to his feet at once, and with the manner of a
cross-examiner demanded: do human beings seem to you to harbour justice
in their souls, or in their purses, (2) callias?

 (2) or, "pockets."

call. in their souls.

ant. and do you pretend to make their souls more righteous by putting
money in their pockets?

call. undoubtedly.

ant. pray how?

call. in this way. when they know that they are furnished with the
means, that is to say, my money, to buy necessaries, they would rather
not incur the risk of evil-doing, and why should they?

ant. and pray, do they repay you these same moneys?

call. i cannot say they do.

ant. well then, do they requite your gifts of gold with gratitude?

call. no, not so much as a bare "thank you." in fact, some of them are
even worse disposed towards me when they have got my money than before.

now, here's a marvel! (exclaimed antisthenes, and as he spoke he eyed
the witness with an air of triumph). you can render people just to all
the world, but towards yourself you cannot?

pray, where's the wonder? (asked the other). do you not see what scores
of carpenters and house-builders there are who spend their time in
building houses for half the world; but for themselves they simply
cannot do it, and are forced to live in lodgings. and so admit that
home-thrust, master sophist; (3) and confess yourself confuted.

 (3) "professor of wisdom."

upon my soul, he had best accept his fate (4) (said socrates). why,
after all, you are only like those prophets who proverbially foretell
the future for mankind, but cannot foresee what is coming upon
themselves.

 (4) or, "the coup de grace."

and so the first discussion ended. (5)

 (5) or, "so ended fytte the first of the word-controversy."

thereupon niceratus: lend me your ears, and i will tell you in what
respects you shall be better for consorting with myself. i presume,
without my telling you, you know that homer, being the wisest of
mankind, has touched upon nearly every human topic in his poems. (6)
whosoever among you, therefore, would fain be skilled in economy, or
oratory, or strategy; whose ambition it is to be like achilles, or ajax,
nestor, or odysseus--one and all pay court to me, for i have all this
knowledge at my fingers' ends.

 (6) or, "his creations are all but coextensive with every mortal
    thing."

pray (interposed antisthenes), (7) do you also know the way to be a
king? (8) since homer praises agamemnon, you are well aware, as being

    a goodly king and eke a spearman bold. (9)

 (7) some modern critics (e.g. f. dummler, "antisthenica," p. 29 foll.)
    maintain plausibly that the author is here glancing (as also plato
    in the "ion") at antisthenes' own treatises against the
    rhapsodists and on a more correct interpretation of homer, {peri
    exegeton} and {peri 'omerou}.

 (8) or, "have you the knowledge also how to play the king?"

 (9) "il." iii. 179. see "mem." iii. ii. 2.

nic. full well i know it, and full well i know the duty of a skilful
charioteer; how he who holds the ribbons must turn his chariot nigh the
pillar's edge (10)

himself inclined upon the polished chariot-board a little to the left
of the twin pair: the right hand horse touch with the prick, and shout a
cheery shout, and give him rein. (11)

i know another thing besides, and you may put it to the test this
instant, if you like. homer somewhere has said: (12)

    and at his side an onion, which to drink gives relish.

so if some one will but bring an onion, you shall reap the benefit of
my sage lore (13) in less than no time, and your wine will taste the
sweeter.

 (10) "il." xxiii. 335; plat. "ion," 537.

 (11) lit. "yield him the reins with his hands."

 (12) "il." xi.630: "and set out a leek savourer of drink" (purves).
    plat. "ion," 538 c.

 (13) "my culinary skill."

here charmides exclaimed: good sirs, let me explain. niceratus is
anxious to go home, redolent of onions, so that his fair lady may
persuade herself, it never entered into anybody's head to kiss her lord.
(14)

 (14) see shakesp. "much ado," v. 2. 51 foll.; "mids. n. d." iv. 2.

bless me, that isn't all (continued socrates); if we do not take care,
we shall win ourselves a comic reputation. (15) a relish must it be, in
very truth, that can sweeten cup as well as platter, this same onion;
and if we are to take to munching onions for desert, see if somebody
does not say of us, "they went to dine with callias, and got more than
their deserts, the epicures." (16)

 (15) lit. "i warrant you! (quoth socrates) and there's another funny
    notion we have every chance of getting fathered on us."

 (16) or, "and had a most hilarious and herbaceous time."

no fear of that (rejoined niceratus). always take a bite of onion before
speeding forth to battle, just as your patrons of the cock-pit give
their birds a feed of garlic (17) before they put them for the fight.
but for ourselves our thoughts are less intent perhaps on dealing blows
than blowing kisses. (18)

 (17) cf. aristoph. "knights," 494:

chorus. and here's the garlic. swallow it down! sausage seller.... what
for? chorus. it will prime you up and make you fight the better.

h. frere.

 (18) "we are concerned less with the lists of battle than of love";
    "we meditate no furious close of battle but of lips." lit. "how we
    shall kiss some one rather than do battle with."

after such sort the theme of their discourse reached its conclusion.

then critobulus spoke: it is now my turn, i think, to state to you the
grounds on which i pride myself on beauty. (19)

 (19) see "hellenica essays," p. 353.

a chorus of voices rejoined: say on.

crit. to begin with, if i am not beautiful, as methinks i be, you will
bring on your own heads the penalty of perjury; for, without waiting to
have the oath administered, you are always taking the gods to witness
that you find me beautiful. and i must needs believe you, for are you
not all honourable men? (20) if i then be so beautiful and affect you,
even as i also am affected by him whose fair face here attracts me, (21)
i swear by all the company of heaven i would not choose the great king's
empire in exchange for what i am--the beauty of the world, the paragon
of animals. (22) and at this instant i feast my eyes on cleinias (23)
gladlier than on all other sights which men deem fair. joyfully will i
welcome blindness to all else, if but these eyes may still behold him
and him only. with sleep and night i am sore vexed, which rob me of
his sight; but to daylight and the sun i owe eternal thanks, for they
restore him to me, my heart's joy, cleinias. (24)

 (20) or, "beautiful and good."

 (21) or, "whose fair face draws me." was cleinias there as a "muta
    persona"? hardly, in spite of {nun}. it is the image of him which
    is present to the mind's eye.

 (22) lit. "being beautiful"; but there is a touch of bombast infused
    into the speech by the artist. cf. the speech of callias ("hell."
    vi. iii. 3) and, for the humour, "cyrop." passim.

 (23) see cobet, "pros. xen." p. 59. cf. "mem." i. iii. 8.

 (24) or, "for that they reveal his splendour to me."

yes, and herein also have we, the beautiful, (25) just claim to boast.
the strong man may by dint of toil obtain good things; the brave, by
danger boldly faced, and the wise by eloquence of speech; but to the
beautiful alone it is given to achieve all ends in absolute quiescence.
to take myself as an example. i know that riches are a sweet possession,
yet sweeter far to me to give all that i have to cleinias than to
receive a fortune from another. gladly would i become a slave--ay,
forfeit freedom--if cleinias would deign to be my lord. toil in his
service were easier for me than rest from labour: danger incurred in his
behalf far sweeter than security of days. so that if you, callias, may
boast of making men more just and upright, to me belongs by juster
right than yours to train mankind to every excellence. we are the
true inspirers (26) who infuse some subtle fire into amorous souls, we
beauties, and thereby raise them to new heights of being; we render them
more liberal in the pursuit of wealth; we give them a zest for toil that
mocks at danger, and enables them where honour the fair vision leads, to
follow. (27) we fill their souls with deeper modesty, a self-constraint
more staunch; about the things they care for most, there floats a
halo of protecting awe. (28) fools and unwise are they who choose not
beauteous men to be their generals. how merrily would i, at any rate,
march through fire by the side of cleinias; (29) and so would all of
you, i know full well, in company of him who now addresses you.

 (25) "we beauties."

 (26) the {eispnelas} in relation to the {aitas}, the inspirer to the
    hearer. cf. theocr. xii. 13; ael. "v. h." iii. 12. see muller,
    "dorians," ii. 300 foll.

 (27) {philokaloterous}. cf. plat. "phaedr." 248 d; "criti." 111 e;
    aristot. "eth. n." iv. 4. 4; x. 9. 3.

 (28) lit. "they feel most awe of what they most desire."

 (29) cf. "mem." i. iii. 9.

cease, therefore, your perplexity, o socrates, abandon fears and doubts,
believe and know that this thing of which i make great boast, my beauty,
has power to confer some benefit on humankind.

once more, let no man dare dishonour beauty, merely because the flower
of it soon fades, since even as a child has growth in beauty, so is it
with the stripling, the grown man, the reverend senior. (30) and
this the proof of my contention. whom do we choose to bear the sacred
olive-shoot (31) in honour of athena?--whom else save beautiful old men?
witnessing thereby (32) that beauty walks hand in hand as a companion
with every age of life, from infancy to eld.

 (30) cf. ib. iii. iii. 12.

 (31) cf. aristoph. "wasps," 544.

 (32) or, "beauty steps in attendance lovingly hand in hand at every
    season of the life of man." so walt whitman, passim.

or again, if it be sweet to win from willing hearts the things we seek
for, i am persuaded that, by the eloquence of silence, i could win a
kiss from yonder girl or boy more speedily than ever you could, o sage!
by help of half a hundred subtle arguments.

eh, bless my ears, what's that? (socrates broke in upon this final
flourish of the speaker). so beautiful you claim to rival me, you
boaster?

crit. why, yes indeed, i hope so, or else i should be uglier than all
the silenuses in the satyric drama. (33)

 (33) the mss. add  ("to whom, be it noted, socrates indeed bore a
    marked resemblance"). obviously a gloss. cf. aristoph. "clouds,"
    224; plat. "symp." 215 b.

good! (socrates rejoined); the moment the programme of discussion is
concluded, (34) please remember, we must obtain a verdict on the point
of beauty. judgment shall be given--not at the bar of alexander, son
of priam--but of these (35) who, as you flatter yourself, have such a
hankering to kiss you.

 (34) lit. "the arguments proposed have gone the round."

 (35) i.e. "the boy and girl." al. "the present company, who are so
    eager to bestow on you their kisses."

oh, socrates (he answered, deprecatingly), will you not leave it to the
arbitrament of cleinias?

then socrates: will you never tire of repeating that one name? it is
cleinias here, there, and everywhere with you.

crit. and if his name died on my lips, think you my mind would less
recall his memory? know you not, i bear so clear an image of him in my
soul, that had i the sculptor's or the limner's skill, i might
portray his features as exactly from this image of the mind as from
contemplation of his actual self.

but socrates broke in: pray, why then, if you bear about this lively
image, why do you give me so much trouble, dragging me to this and that
place, where you hope to see him?

crit. for this good reason, socrates, the sight of him inspires
gladness, whilst his phantom brings not joy so much as it engenders
longing.

at this point hermogenes protested: i find it most unlike you, socrates,
to treat thus negligently one so passion-crazed as critobulus.

socrates replied: do you suppose the sad condition of the patient dates
from the moment only of our intimacy?

herm. since when, then?

soc. since when? why, look at him: the down begins to mantle on his
cheeks, (36) and on the nape (37) of cleinias' neck already mounts.
the fact is, when they fared to the same school together, he caught the
fever. this his father was aware of, and consigned him to me, hoping
i might be able to do something for him. ay, and his plight is not so
sorry now. once he would stand agape at him like one whose gaze is
fixed upon the gorgons, (38) his eyes one stony stare, and like a stone
himself turn heavily away. but nowadays i have seen the statue actually
blink. (39) and yet, may heaven help me! my good sirs, i think, between
ourselves, the culprit must have bestowed a kiss on cleinias, than which
love's flame asks no fiercer fuel. (40) so insatiable a thing it is
and so suggestive of mad fantasy. (and for this reason held perhaps in
higher honour, because of all external acts the close of lip with lip
bears the same name as that of soul with soul in love.) (41) wherefore,
say i, let every one who wishes to be master of himself and sound of
soul abstain from kisses imprinted on fair lips. (42)

 (36) lit. "creeping down beside his ears." cf. "od." xi. 319:

{prin sphoin upo krotaphoisin ioulous anthesai pukasai te genus euanthei
lakhne.}

    "(zeus destroyed the twain) ere the curls had bloomed beneath
    their temples, and darked their chins with the blossom of youth."
    --butcher and lang. cf. theocr. xv. 85: {praton ioulon apo
    krotaphon kataballon}, "with the first down upon his cheeks"
    (lang); aesch. "theb." 534.

 (37) {pros to opisthen}, perhaps = "ad posteriorem capitis partem,"
    which would be more applicable to critobulus, whose whiskers were
    just beginning to grow, than to callias. possibly we should read
    (after pollux, ii. 10) {peri ten upenen}, "on the upper lip." see
    plat. "protag." 309 b; "il." xxiv. 348; "od." x. 279.

 (38) cf. pind. "pyth." x. 75.

 (39) see "cyrop." i. iv. 28; shakesp. "ven. and ad." 89: "but when her
    lips were ready for his pay, he winks, and turns his lips another
    way."

 (40) or, "a kiss which is to passion as dry combustious matter is to
    fire," shakesp. ib. 1162.

 (41) or, "is namesake of the love within the soul of lovers." the
    whole passage, involving a play on the words {philein
    phileisthai}, "where kisses rain without, love reigns within," is
    probably to be regarded as a gloss. cf. "mem." i. iii. 13.

 (42) cf. "mem." i. iii. 8-14.

then charmides: oh! socrates, why will you scare your friends with these
hobgoblin terrors, (43) bidding us all beware of handsome faces,
whilst you yourself--yes, by apollo, i will swear i saw you at the
schoolmaster's (44) that time when both of you were poring over one
book, in which you searched for something, you and critobulus, head to
head, shoulder to shoulder bare, as if incorporate? (45)

 (43) cf. plat. "crit." 46 d; "hell." iv. iv. 17; arist. "birds," 1245.

 (44) "grammarian's." plat. "protag." 312 b; 326 d; dem. 315. 8.

 (45) like hermia and helena, "mids. n. d." iii. 2. 208.

as yes, alack the day! (he answered); and that is why, no doubt, my
shoulder ached for more than five days afterwards, as if i had been
bitten by some fell beast, and methought i felt a sort of scraping at
the heart. (46) now therefore, in the presence of these witnesses, i
warn you, critobulus, never again to touch me till you wear as thick a
crop of hair (47) upon your chin as on your head.

 (46) reading {knisma}, "scratching." plat. "hipp. maj." 304 a. al.
    {knesma}.

 (47) see jebb, "theophr. ch." xxiv. 16.

so pell-mell they went at it, half jest half earnest, and so the medley
ended. callias here called on charmides.

call. now, charmides, it lies with you to tell us why you pride yourself
on poverty. (48)

 (48) zeune, cf. "cyrop." viii. iii. 35-50.

charmides responded: on all hands it is admitted, i believe, that
confidence is better than alarm; better to be a freeman than a slave;
better to be worshipped than pay court to others; better to be trusted
than to be suspected by one's country.

well now, i will tell you how it fared with me in this same city when
i was wealthy. first, i lived in daily terror lest some burglar should
break into my house and steal my goods and do myself some injury. i
cringed before informers. (49) i was obliged to pay these people court,
because i knew that i could injure them far less than they could injure
me. never-ending the claims upon my pocket which the state enforced
upon me; and as to setting foot abroad, that was beyond the range of
possibility. but now that i have lost my property across the frontier,
(50) and derive no income from my lands in attica itself; now that my
very household goods have been sold up, i stretch my legs at ease, i get
a good night's rest. the distrust of my fellow-citizens has vanished;
instead of trembling at threats, it is now my turn to threaten; at last
i feel myself a freeman, with liberty to go abroad or stay at home as
suits my fancy. the tables now are turned. it is the rich who rise to
give me their seats, who stand aside and make way for me as i meet them
in the streets. to-day i am like a despot, yesterday i was literally a
slave; formerly it was i who had to pay my tribute (51) to the sovereign
people, now it is i who am supported by the state by means of general
taxation. (52)

 (49) "and police agents."

 (50) cf. "mem." ii. viii. 1.

 (51) {phoros}, tributum. al. "property-tax." cf. "econ." ii. 6.

 (52) {telos}, vectigal. sturz, "lex. xen." s.v. cf. "pol. ath." i. 3.

and there is another thing. so long as i was rich, they threw in my
teeth as a reproach that i was friends with socrates, but now that i am
become a beggar no one troubles his head two straws about the matter.
once more, the while i rolled in plenty i had everything to lose, and,
as a rule, i lost it; what the state did not exact, some mischance stole
from me. but now that is over. i lose nothing, having nought to lose;
but, on the contrary, i have everything to gain, and live in hope of
some day getting something. (53)

 (53) "i feed on the pleasures of hope, and fortune in the future."

call. and so, of course, your one prayer is that you may never more be
rich, and if you are visited by a dream of luck your one thought is to
offer sacrifice to heaven to avert misfortune. (54)

 (54) or, "you wake up in a fright, and offer sacrifice to the
    'averters.'" for {tois apotropaiois} see aristoph. "plutus," 359;
    plat. "laws," 854 b; "hell." iii. iii. 4.

char. no, that i do not. on the contrary, i run my head into each danger
most adventurously. i endure, if haply i may see a chance of getting
something from some quarter of the sky some day.

come now (socrates exclaimed), it lies with you, sir, you, antisthenes,
to explain to us, how it is that you, with means so scanty, make so loud
a boast of wealth.

because (he answered) i hold to the belief, sirs, that wealth and
poverty do not lie in a man's estate, but in men's souls. even in
private life how many scores of people have i seen, who, although they
roll in wealth, yet deem themselves so poor, there is nothing they will
shrink from, neither toil nor danger, in order to add a little to their
store. (55) i have known two brothers, (56) heirs to equal fortunes,
one of whom has enough, more than enough, to cover his expenditure; the
other is in absolute indigence. and so to monarchs, there are not a
few, i perceive, so ravenous of wealth that they will outdo the veriest
vagrants in atrocity. want (57) prompts a thousand crimes, you must
admit. why do men steal? why break burglariously into houses? why hale
men and women captive and make slaves of them? is it not from want?
nay, there are monarchs who at one fell swoop destroy whole houses, make
wholesale massacre, and oftentimes reduce entire states to slavery, and
all for the sake of wealth. these i must needs pity for the cruel malady
which plagues them. their condition, to my mind, resembles that poor
creature's who, in spite of all he has (58) and all he eats, can never
stay the wolf that gnaws his vitals.

 (55) cf. "cyrop." viii. ii. 21; hor. "epist." i. 2. 26, "semper avarus
    eget."

 (56) is antisthenes thinking of callias and hermogenes? (presuming
    these are sons of hipponicus and brothers). cf. "mem." ii. x. 3.

 (57) or, "'tis want that does it." see "pol. ath." i. 5; "rev," i. 1.

 (58) reading {ekhon}, or if {pinon}, transl. "who eats and drinks, but
    never sates himself."

but as to me, my riches are so plentiful i cannot lay my hands on them
myself; (59) yet for all that i have enough to eat till my hunger is
stayed, to drink till my thirst is sated; (60) to clothe myself withal;
and out of doors not callias there, with all his riches, is more safe
than i from shivering; and when i find myself indoors, what warmer
shirting (61) do i need than my bare walls? what ampler greatcoat than
the tiles above my head? these seem to suit me well enough; and as to
bedclothes, i am not so ill supplied but it is a business to arouse me
in the morning.

 (59) "that i can scarce discover any portion of it." zeune cf. "econ."
    viii. 2.

 (60) so "the master" himself. see "mem." i. ii. 1, vi. 5.

 (61) cf. aristot. "pol." ii. 8. 1, of hippodamus.

and as to sexual desire, my body's need is satisfied by what comes first
to hand. indeed, there is no lack of warmth in the caress which greets
me, just because it is unsought by others. (62)

 (62) cf. "mem." i. iii. 14, the germ of cynicism and stoicism, the
    socratic {xs} form of "better to marry than to burn."

well then, these several pleasures i enjoy so fully that i am much more
apt to pray for less than more of them, so strongly do i feel that some
of them are sweeter than what is good for one or profitable.

but of all the precious things in my possession, i reckon this the
choicest, that were i robbed of my whole present stock, there is no work
so mean, but it would amply serve me to furnish me with sustenance. why,
look you, whenever i desire to fare delicately, i have not to purchase
precious viands in the market, which becomes expensive, but i open
the storehouse of my soul, and dole them out. (63) indeed, as far as
pleasure goes, i find it better to await desire before i suffer meat
or drink to pass my lips, than to have recourse to any of your costly
viands, as, for instance, now, when i have chanced on this fine thasian
wine, (64) and sip it without thirst. but indeed, the man who makes
frugality, not wealth of worldly goods, his aim, is on the face of it a
much more upright person. and why?--the man who is content with what he
has will least of all be prone to clutch at what is his neighbour's.

 (63) or, "turn to the storehouse of a healthy appetite." see "apol."
    18, the same sentiment "ex ore socratis."

 (64) see athen. "deipnos." i. 28.

and here's a point worth noting. wealth of my sort will make you liberal
of soul. look at socrates; from him it was i got these riches. he did
not supply me with it by weight or by measure, but just as much as i
could carry, he with bounteous hand consigned to me. and i, too, grudge
it to no man now. to all my friends without distinction i am ready to
display my opulence: come one, come all; and whosoever likes to take
a share is welcome to the wealth that lies within my soul. yes, and
moreover, that most luxurious of possessions, (65) unbroken leisure, you
can see, is mine, which leaves me free to contemplate things worthy of
contemplation, (66) and to drink in with my ears all charming sounds.
and what i value most, freedom to spend whole days in pure scholastic
intercourse (67) with socrates, to whom i am devoted. (68) and he,
on his side, is not the person to admire those whose tale of gold and
silver happens to be the largest, but those who are well-pleasing to him
he chooses for companions, and will consort with to the end.

 (65) see eur. "ion," 601. lit. "at every moment i command it."

 (66) "to gaze upon all fairest shows (like a spectator in the
    theatre), and to drink in sounds most delectable." so walt
    whitman.

 (67) aristot. "rhet." ii. 4. 12; "eth. n." ix. 4. 9.

 (68) see "mem." iii. xi. 17.

with these words the speaker ended, and callias exclaimed:

by hera, i envy you your wealth, antisthenes, firstly, because the state
does not lay burthens on you and treat you like a slave; and secondly,
people do not fall into a rage with you when you refuse to be their
creditor.

you may stay your envy (interposed niceratus), i shall presently present
myself to borrow of him this same key of his to independence. (69)
trained as i am to cast up figures by my master homer--

    seven tripods, which ne'er felt the fire, and of gold ten talents
    and burnished braziers twenty, and horses twelve-- (70)

by weight and measure duly reckoned, (71) i cannot stay my craving
for enormous wealth. and that's the reason certain people, i daresay,
imagine i am inordinately fond of riches.

 (69) or, "his want-for-nothing," or, "supply-all."

 (70) niceratus quotes "il." ix. 122, 123, 263, 264.

 (71) or, "by number and by measure," "so much apiece, so much a
    pound," in reference to antisthenes' remark that socrates does not
    stint his "good things."

the remark drew forth a peal of laughter from the company, who thought
the speaker hit the truth exactly.

then some one: it lies with you, hermogenes, to tell us who your friends
are; and next, to demonstrate the greatness of their power and their
care for you, if you would prove to us your right to pride yoruself on
them.

herm. that the gods know all things, that the present and the future
lie before their eyes, are tenets held by hellenes and barbarians
alike. this is obvious; or else, why do states and nations, one and all,
inquire of the gods by divination what they ought to do and what they
ought not? this also is apparent, that we believe them able to do us
good and to do us harm; or why do all men pray to heaven to avert the
evil and bestow the good? well then, my boast is that these gods, who
know and can do all things, (72) deign to be my friends; so that, by
reason of their care for me, i can never escape from their sight, (73)
neither by night nor by day, whithersoever i essay to go, whatsoever i
take in hand to do. (74) but because they know beforehand the end and
issue of each event, they give me signals, sending messengers, be it
some voice, (75) or vision of the night, with omens of the solitary
bird, which tell me what i should and what i should not do. when i
listen to their warnings all goes well with me, i have no reason to
repent; but if, as ere now has been the case, i have been disobedient,
chastisement has overtaken me.

 (72) cf. "mem." i. i. 19; i. iv. 18.

 (73) schneid. cf. hom. "il." x. 279, {oude se letho kinomenos}, "nor
    doth any motion of mine escape thee" (a. lang); and see arrian,
    "epictet." i. 12. 3.

 (74) cf. ps. cxxxix. "domine probasti."

 (75) see "mem." i. i. 3; "apol." xii. 13; "cyrop." viii. vii. 3.

then socrates: all this i well believe, (76) but there is one thing
i would gladly learn of you: what service do you pay the gods, so to
secure their friendship?

 (76) lit. "nay, nought of the things you tell us is incredible,
    but..."

truly it is not a ruinous service, socrates (he answered)--far from it.
i give them thanks, which is not costly. i make return to them of all
they give to me from time to time. i speak well of them, with all the
strength i have. and whenever i take their sacred names to witness, i do
not wittingly falsify my word.

then god be praised (said socrates), if being what you are, you have
such friends; the gods themselves, it would appear, delight in nobleness
of soul. (77)

 (77) {kalokagathia}, "beautiful and gentle manhood."

thus, in solemn sort, the theme was handled, thus gravely ended.

but now it was the jester's turn, and so they fell to asking him: (78)
what could he see to pride himself upon so vastly in the art of making
people laugh?

 (78) lit. "now that they had come to philippus (in the 'period' of
    discussion), they..." or read, after hartman, "an. xen." p.
    242, {eken} (sc. {o logos}).

surely i have good reason (he replied). the whole world knows my
business is to set them laughing, so when they are in luck's way,
they eagerly invite me to a share of it; but if ill betide them,
helter-skelter off they go, and never once turn back, (79) so fearful
are they i may set them laughing will he nill he.

 (79) plat. "rep." 620 e; "laws," 854 c.

nic. heavens! you have good reason to be proud; with me it is just the
opposite. when any of my friends are doing well, they take good care
to turn their backs on me, (80) but if ever it goes ill with them,
they claim relationship by birth, (81) and will not let their long-lost
cousin out of sight.

 (80) or, "they take good care to get out of my way," "they hold aloof
    from me entirely."

 (81) or, "produce the family-pedigree and claim me for a cousin." cf.
    lucian v., "tim." 49; ter. "phorm." ii. 33, 45.

charm. well, well! and you, sir (turning to the syracusan), what do you
pride yourself upon? no doubt, upon the boy?

the syr. not i, indeed; i am terribly afraid concerning him. it is plain
enough to me that certain people are contriving for his ruin. (82)

 (82) {diaphtheirai} = (1) to destroy, make away with; (2) to ruin and
    corrupt, seduce by bribes or otherwise.

good gracious! (83) (socrates exclaimed, when he heard that), what crime
can they conceive your boy is guilty of that they should wish to make an
end of him?

 (83) lit. "heracles!" "zounds!"

the syr. i do not say they want to murder him, but wheedle him away with
bribes to pass his nights with them.

soc. and if that happened, you on your side, it appears, believe the boy
will be corrupted?

the syr. beyond all shadow of a doubt, most villainously.

soc. and you, of course, you never dream of such a thing. you don't
spend nights with him?

the syr. of course i do, all night and every night.

soc. by hera, what a mighty piece of luck (84) for you--to be so happily
compounded, of such flesh and blood. you alone can't injure those who
sleep beside you. you have every right, it seems, to boast of your own
flesh, if nothing else.

 (84) cf. plat. "symp." 217 a.

the syr. nay, in sooth, it is not on that i pride myself.

soc. well, on what then?

the syr. why, on the silly fools who come and see my puppet show. (85) i
live on them.

 (85) "my marionettes." cf. herod. ii. 48; lucian lxxii., "de syr. d."
    16; aristot. "de mund." 6.

phil. ah yes! and that explains how the other day i heard you praying to
the gods to grant you, wheresoe'er you chance to be, great store of corn
and wine, but dearth of wits. (86)

 (86) or, "of fruits abundance, but of wits a famine." cf. plat. "rep."
    546 a. his prayer resembles that of the thievish trader in ovid,
    "fast." v. 675 foll., "grant me to-day my daily... fraud!" but
    in spite of himself (like dogberry), he seems to pray to the gods
    to "write him down an ass"!

pass on (said callias); now it is your turn, socrates. what have you to
say to justify your choice? how can you boast of so discredited an art?
(87)

 (87) sc. "the hold-door trade."

he answered: let us first decide (88) what are the duties of the good
go-between; (89) and please to answer every question without hesitating;
let us know the points to which we mutually assent. (90) are you agreed
to that?

 (88) or, "define in common." cf. "mem." iv. vi. 15.

 (89) or, "man-praiser." cf. "the manx witch," p. 47 (t. e. brown),
    "and harry, more like a dooiney-molla for jack, lak helpin him to
    woo." see, too, mr. hall caine's "manxman," p. 73.

 (90) see plat. "rep." 342 d, for a specimen of socratic procedure,
    "from one point of agreement to another."

the company, in chorus. without a doubt (they answered, and the formula,
once started, was every time repeated by the company, full chorus).

soc. are you agreed it is the business of a good go-between to make him
(or her) on whom he plies his art agreeable to those with them? (91)

 (91) al. "their followers." see "mem." ii. vi. 36.

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. and, further, that towards agreeableness, one step at any rate
consists in wearing a becoming fashion of the hair and dress? (92) are
you agreed to that?

 (92) see becker, "char." exc. iii. to sc. xi.

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. and we know for certain, that with the same eyes a man may dart a
look of love or else of hate (93) on those he sees. are you agreed?

 (93) see "mem." iii. x. 5.

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. well! and with the same tongue and lips and voice may speak with
modesty or boastfulnes?

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. and there are words that bear the stamp of hate, and words that
tend to friendliness? (94)

 (94) cf. ep. st. james iii. 10, "out of the same mouth proceedeth
    blessing and cursing."

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. the good go-between will therefore make his choice between them,
and teach only what conduces to agreeableness?

omnes. without a doubt.

soc. and is he the better go-between who can make his clients pleasing
to one person only, or can make them pleasing to a number? (95)

 (95) or, "to the many." the question is ambiguous. {e} = "an" or
    "quam."

the company was here divided; the one half answered, "yes, of course,
the largest number," whilst the others still maintained, "without a
doubt."

and socrates, remarking, "that proposition is agreed to also," thus
proceeded: and if further he were able to make them pleasing to the
whole community, should we not have found in this accomplished person an
arch-go-between?

clearly so (they answered with one voice).

soc. if then a man had power to make his clients altogether pleasing;
that man, i say, might justly pride himself upon his art, and should by
rights receive a large reward? (96)

 (96) or, "he deserves to do a rattling business," "to take handsome
    fees." cf. sheridan's mrs. coupler, in "a trip to scarborough."

and when these propositions were agreed to also, he turned about
and said: just such a man, i take it, is before you in the person of
antisthenes! (97)

 (97) see diog. laert. "antisth." vi. i. 8; plut. "symp." ii. 1. 503.

whereupon antisthenes exclaimed: what! are you going to pass on the
business? will you devolve this art of yours on me as your successor,
socrates? (98)

 (98) or, "going to give up business, and hand on the trade to me as
    your successor?"

i will, upon my word, i will (he answered): since i see that you have
practised to some purpose, nay elaborated, an art which is the handmaid
to this other.

and what may that be? asked antisthenes.

soc. the art of the procurer. (99)

 (99) cf. plat. "theaet." 150 a; aristot. "eth. n." v. 2, 13; aeschin.
    3, 7; plut. "solon," 23.

the other (in a tone of deep vexation): pray, what thing of the sort are
you aware i ever perpetrated?

soc. i am aware that it was you who introduced our host here, callias,
to that wise man prodicus; (100) they were a match, you saw, the one
enamoured of philosophy, and the other in need of money. it was you
again, i am well enough aware, who introduced him once again to hippias
(101) of elis, from whom he learnt his "art of memory"; (102) since
which time he has become a very ardent lover, (103) from inability to
forget each lovely thing he sets his eyes on. and quite lately, if i
am not mistaken, it was you who sounded in my ears such praise of our
visitor from heraclea, (104) that first you made me thirst for his
society, and then united us. (105) for which indeed i am your debtor,
since i find him a fine handsome fellow and true gentleman. (106) and
did you not, moreover, sing the praises of aeschylus of phlius (107) in
my ears and mine in his?--in fact, affected us so much by what you said,
we fell in love and took to coursing wildly in pursuit of one another
like two dogs upon a trail. (108)

 (100) or, "the sage," "the sophist." see "mem." i. vi. 13; ii. i. 21.

 (101) see "mem." iv. iv. 5; and for his art of memory cf. plat. "hipp.
    min." 368 d; "hipp. maj." 285 e.

 (102) the "memoria technica" (see aristot. "de an." iii. 3, 6), said
    to have been invented by simonides of ceos. cic. "de or." ii. 86;
    "de fin." ii. 32; quinct. xi. 2. 559.

 (103) or, "has grown amorous to a degree"  (al. "an adept in love's
    lore himself." cf. plat. "rep." 474 d, "an authority in love."--
    jowett) "for the simple reason he can't forget each lovely thing
    he once has seen." through the "ars memoriae" of hippias, it
    becomes an "idee fixe" of the mind.

 (104) perhaps zeuxippus. see plat. "prot." 318 b. al. zeuxis, also a
    native of heraclea. see "mem." i. iv. 3; "econ." x. 1.

 (105) or, "introduced him to me." cf. "econ." iii. 14; plat. "lach."
    200 d.

 (106) "an out-and-out {kalos te kagathos}."

 (107) who this phliasian is, no one knows.

 (108) al. "like two hounds chevying after one another."

with such examples of your wonder-working skill before my eyes, i
must suppose you are a first-rate matchmaker. for consider, a man with
insight to discern two natures made to be of service to each other, and
with power to make these same two people mutually enamoured! that is the
sort of man, i take it, who should weld together states in friendship;
cement alliances with gain to the contracting parties; (109) and, in
general, be found an acquisition to those several states; to friends and
intimates, and partisans in war, a treasure worth possessing. (110) but
you, my friend, you got quite angry. one would suppose i had given you
an evil name in calling you a first-rate matchmaker.

 (109) al. "and cement desirable matrimonial connections." cf. aristot.
    "pol." iii. 9, 13. 1280 b; v. 4, 5-8. 1303 b.

 (110) see the conversation with critobulus, so often referred to,
    {peri philias}, in "mem." ii. vi.

yes (he answered meekly), but now i am calm. it is clear enough, if
i possess these powers i shall find myself surcharged with spiritual
riches.

in this fashion the cycle of the speeches was completed. (111)

 (111) see hug, "einleitung," xxxi. "quellen des platonischen
    symposion."



v

then callias: our eyes are on you, critobulus. yours to enter the lists
(1) against the champion socrates, who claims the prize of beauty. do
you hesitate?

 (1) soph. "fr." 234; thuc. i. 93.

soc. likely enough he does, for possibly he sees sir pandarus stands
high in their esteem who are the judges of the contest.

in spite of which (retorted critobulus), i am not for drawing back. (2)
i am ready; so come on, and if you have any subtle argument to prove
that you are handsomer than i am, now's your time, instruct us. but just
stop one minute; have the goodness, please, to bring the lamp a little
closer.

 (2) or, "i do; but all the same, i am not for shirking." cf. aristoph.
    "frogs," 860, {etiomos eum egoge, kouk anaduomai, daknein}: "i'm
    up to it; i am resolved" (frere); dem. "de f. leg." 406 20: "his
    resolution never reached that point, but shrank back, for his
    conscience checked it" (kennedy).

soc. well then, i call upon you first of all, as party to this suit,
to undergo the preliminary examination. (3) attend to what i say, and
please be good enough to answer.

 (3) the {anakrisis}, or "previous inquiry" (before one of the archons)
    of parties concerned in a suit, to see whether the action lay. cf.
    plat. "charm." 176 c. see gow, "companion," xiv. 74.

crit. do you be good enough yourself to put your questions.

soc. do you consider that the quality of beauty is confined to man, or
is it to be found in other objects also? what is your belief on this
point?

crit. for my part, i consider it belongs alike to animals--the horse,
the ox--and to many things inanimate: that is to say, a shield, a sword,
a spear are often beautiful.

soc. how is it possible that things, in no respect resembling one
another, should each and all be beautiful? (4)

 (4) see "mem." iii. viii. 5, quoted by galen, "de usu part." i. 370.

crit. of course it is, god bless me! if well constructed by the hand
of man to suit the sort of work for which we got them, or if naturally
adapted to satisfy some want, the things in either case are beautiful.

soc. can you tell me, then, what need is satisfied by our eyes?

crit. clearly, the need of vision.

soc. if so, my eyes are proved at once to be more beautiful than yours.

crit. how so?

soc. because yours can only see just straight in front of them, whereas
mine are prominent and so projecting, they can see aslant. (5)

 (5) or, "squint sideways and command the flanks."

crit. and amongst all animals, you will tell us that the crab has
loveliest eyes? (6) is that your statement?

 (6) or, "is best provided in respect of eyeballs."

soc. decidedly, the creature has. and all the more so, since for
strength and toughness its eyes by nature are the best constructed.

crit. well, let that pass. to come to our two noses, which is the more
handsome, yours or mine?

soc. mine, i imagine, if, that is, the gods presented us with noses for
the sake of smelling. your nostrils point to earth; but mine are spread
out wide and flat, as if to welcome scents from every quarter.

crit. but consider, a snubness of the nose, how is that more beautiful
than straightness? (7)

 (7) or, "your straight nose." cf. plat. "theaet." 209 c: soc. "or, if
    i had further known you not only as having nose and eyes, but as
    having a snub nose and prominent eyes, should i have any more
    notion of you than myself and others who resemble me?" cf. also
    aristot. "pol." v. 9, 7: "a nose which varies from the ideal of
    straightness to a hook or snub may still be a good shape and
    agreeable to the eye; but if the excess be very great, all
    symmetry is lost, and the nose at last ceases to be a nose at all
    on account of some excess in one direction or defect in the other;
    and this is true of every other part of the human body. the same
    law of proportion holds in states."--jowett.

soc. for this good reason, that a snub nose does not discharge the
office of a barrier; (8) it allows the orbs of sight free range of
vision: whilst your towering nose looks like an insulting wall of
partition to shut off the two eyes. (9)

 (8) or, "the humble snub is not a screen or barricade."

 (9) cf. "love's labour lost," v. 2. 568: boyet. "your nose says no,
    you are not, for it stands too right"; also "the song of solomon,"
    vii. 4: "thy nose is the tower of lebanon, which looketh toward
    damascus."

as to the mouth (proceeded critobulus), i give in at once; for, given
mouths are made for purposes of biting, you could doubtless bite off a
much larger mouthful with your mouth than i with mine.

soc. yes, and you will admit, perhaps, that i can give a softer kiss
than you can, thanks to my thick lips.

crit. it seems i have an uglier mouth than any ass.

soc. and here is a fact which you will have to reckon with, if further
evidence be needed to prove that i am handsomer than you. the naiads,
nymphs, divine, have as their progeny sileni, who are much more like
myself, i take it, than like you. is that conclusive?

nay, i give it up (cried critobulus), i have not a word to say in
answer. i am silenced. let them record the votes. i fain would know at
once what i must suffer or must pay. (10) only (he added) let them vote
in secret. (11) i am afraid your wealth and his (antisthenes') combined
may overpower me.

 (10) for this formula see "dict. ant." {timema}. cf. "econ." xi. 25;
    plat. "apol." 36 b; "statesm." 299 a; "laws," freq.; dem. 529. 23;
    533. 2.

 (11) and not as in the case described (thuc. iv. 74), where the people
    (at megara) were compelled to give sentence on the political
    opponents of the oligarchs by an open vote. cf. lysias, 133, 12,
    {ten de psephon ouk eis kadiskous, alla phaneran epi tas trapezas
    tautas dei tithenai}.

accordingly the boy and girl began to register the votes in secret,
while socrates directed the proceedings. he would have the lamp-stand
(12) this time brought close up to critobulus; the judges must on no
account be taken in; the victor in the suit would get from the two
judges, not a wreath of ribands (13) for a chaplet, but some kisses.

 (12) {ton lukhnon} here, above, s. 2, {ton lamptera}. both, i take it,
    are oil-lamps, and differ merely as "light" and "lamp."

 (13) cf. plat. "symp." 213; "hell." v. i. 3.

when the urns were emptied, it was found that every vote, without
exception, had been cast for critobulus. (14)

 (14) lit. "when the pebbles were turned out and proved to be with
    critobulus, socrates remarked, 'papae!'" which is as much to say,
    "od's pity!"

whereat socrates: bless me! you don't say so? the coin you deal in,
critobulus, is not at all like that of callias. his makes people just;
whilst yours, like other filthy lucre, can corrupt both judge and jury.
(15)

 (15) {kai dikastas kai kritas}, "both jury and presiding judges," i.e.
    the company and the boy and girl.



vi

thereupon some members of the party called on critobulus to accept the
meed of victory in kisses (due from boy and girl); others urged him
first to bribe their master; whilst others bandied other jests. amidst
the general hilarity hermogenes alone kept silence.

whereat socrates turned to the silent man, and thus accosted him:
hermogenes, what is a drunken brawl? can you explain to us?

he answered: if you ask me what it is, i do not know, but i can tell you
what it seems to me to be.

soc. that seems as good. what does it seem?

her. a drunken brawl, in my poor judgment, is annoyance caused to people
over wine.

soc. are you aware that you at present are annoying us by silence?

her. what, whilst you are talking?

soc. no, when we pause a while.

her. then you have not observed that, as to any interval between your
talk, a man would find it hard to insert a hair, much more one grain of
sense.

then socrates: o callias, to the rescue! help a man severely handled by
his cross-examiner.

call. with all my heart (and as he spoke he faced hermogenes). why, when
the flute is talking, we are as silent as the grave.

her. what, would you have me imitate nicostratus (1) the actor, reciting
his tetrameters (2) to the music of the fife? must i discourse to you in
answer to the flute?

 (1) see cobet, "pros. xen." p. 53; and cf. diog. laert. iv. 3, 4;
    polyaen. vi. 10; "hell." iv. viii. 18.

 (2) see aristoph. "clouds," where socrates is giving strepsiades a
    lesson in "measures," 639-646: {poteron to trimetron e to
    tetrametron}.

then socrates: by all that's holy, i wish you would, hermogenes. how
delightful it would be. just as a song sounds sweeter in concert with
the flute, so would your talk be more mellifluous attuned to its soft
pipings; and particularly if you would use gesticulation like the
flute-girl, to suit the tenor of your speech.

here callias demanded: and when our friend (antisthenes) essays to
cross-examine people (3) at a banquet, what kind of piping (4) should he
have?

 (3) or, "a poor body," in reference to the elentic onslaught made on
    himself by antisthenes above.

 (4) {to aulema}, a composition for reed instruments, "music for the
    flute." cf. aristoph. "frogs," 1302.

ant. the person in the witness-box would best be suited with a
serpent-hissing theme. (5)

 (5) or, "motif on a scrannel pipe." see l. & s. s.v. {puthaules}. cf.
    poll. iv. 81, {puthikon aulema}, an air ({nomos}) played on the
    {puthois aulos}, expressing the battle between apollo and the
    python, the hiss of which was imitated.

thus the stream of talk flowed on; until the syracusan, who was
painfully aware that while the company amused themselves, his
"exhibition" was neglected, turned, in a fit of jealous spleen, at last
on socrates. (6)

 (6) "the syracusan is 'civil as an orange, and of that jealous
    complexion.'"

the syr. they call you socrates. are you that person commonly nicknamed
the thinker? (7)

 (7) apparently he has been to see the "clouds" (exhibited first in 423
    b.c.), and has conceived certain ideas concerning socrates, "a
    wise man, who speculated about the heaven above, and searched into
    the earth beneath, and made the worse appear the better cause."
    plat. "apol." 18 b, 19 c. "clouds," 101, 360, {khair o presbuta
   ... ton nun meteorosophiston... ta te meteora phrontistes}.

soc. which surely is a better fate than to be called a thoughtless
person?

the syr. perhaps, if you were not thought to split your brains on things
above us--transcendental stuff. (8)

 (8) or, "if only you were held to be less 'meteoric,' less head-in-
    airy in your speculations."

soc. and is there anything more transcendental than the gods?

the syr. by heaven! no, it is not the gods above us whom you care for,
but for matters void of use and valueless. (9)

 (9) it is impossible to give the play on words. the syr.
    {anophelestaton}. soc. {ano... ophelousin}. schenkl after
    madvig emend.: {ton ano en nephelais onton} = "but for things in
    the clouds above."

soc. it seems, then, by your showing i do care for them. how value less
the gods, not more, if being above us they make the void of use to send
us rain, and cause their light to shine on us? and now, sir, if you do
not like this frigid (10) argument, why do you cause me trouble? the
fault is yours. (11)

 (10) cf. "cyrop." viii. iv. 22, 23.

 (11) {pho parekhousin... pragmata moi parekhon}. lit. "cause light
   ... causing me trouble."

well, let that be (the other answered); answer me one question: how
many fleas' feet distance is it, pray, from you to me? (12) they say you
measure them by geometric scale.

 (12) see aristoph. "clouds," 144 foll.:

{aneret' arti khairephonta sokrates psullan oposous alloito tous autes
podas dakousa gar...}

    cf. lucian, ii. "prom. in verb. 6," and "hudibras, the second part
    of," canto iii.:

how many scores a flea will jump of his own length from head to rump
which socrates and chaerephon in vain essayed so long agon.

but here antisthenes, appealing to philippus, interposed: you are a
man full of comparisons. (13) does not this worthy person strike you as
somewhat like a bully seeking to pick a quarrel? (14)

 (13) like biron, "l. l. l." v. 2. 854. or, "you are a clever
    caricaturist." see plat. "symp." 215 a; hug, "enleitung," xiv.;
    aristoph. "birds," 804 (frere, p. 173); "wasps," 1309.

 (14) aristoph. "frogs," 857, "for it ill beseems illustrious bards to
    scold like market-women." (frere, p. 269); "knights," 1410, "to
    bully"; "eccles." 142:

{kai loidorountai g' osper empepokotes, kai ton paroinount' ekpherous'
oi toxotai.}

yes (replied the jester), he has a striking likeness to that person and
a heap of others. he bristles with metaphors.

soc. for all that, do not you be too eager to draw comparisons at his
expense, or you will find yourself the image of a scold and brawler.
(15)

 (15) or, "a striking person."

phil. but what if i compare him to all the primest creatures of the
world, to beauty's nonpareils, (16) to nature's best--i might be justly
likened to a flatterer but not a brawler. (17)

 (16) lit. "compare him to those in all things beauteous and the best."
    with {tois pasi kalois kai tois beltistois} cf. thuc. v. 28, {oi
    'argeioi arista eskhon tois pasi}, "the argives were in excellent
    condition in all respects." as to philippus's back-handed
    compliment to the showman, it reminds one of peter quince's
    commendation of bottom: "yea and the best person too; and he is a
    very paramour for a sweet voice."

 (17) it is not easy to keep pace with the merryman's jests; but if i
    follow his humour, he says to socrates: "if the cap is to fit, you
    must liken me to one who quits 'assault and battery' for
    'compliments  (sotto voce, "lies") and flattery.'"

soc. why now, you are like a person apt to pick a quarrel, since you
imply they are all his betters. (18)

 (18) when socrates says {ei pant' autou beltio phes einai, k.t.l.},
    the sense seems to be: "no, if you say that all these prime
    creatures are better than he is, you are an abusive person still."

phil. what, would you have me then compare him to worse villains?

soc. no, not even to worse villains.

phil. what, then, to nothing, and to nobody?

soc. to nought in aught. let him remain his simple self--

phil. incomparable. but if my tongue is not to wag, whatever shall i do
to earn my dinner?

soc. why, that you shall quite easily, if with your wagging tongue you
do not try to utter things unutterable.

here was a pretty quarrel over wine soon kindled and soon burnt.



vii

but on the instant those who had not assisted in the fray gave tongue,
the one part urging the jester to proceed with his comparisons, and the
other part dissuading.

the voice of socrates was heard above the tumult: since we are all so
eager to be heard at once, what fitter time than now to sing a song, in
chorus.

and suiting the action to the words, he commenced a stave.

the song was barely finished, when a potter's wheel was brought in, on
which the dancing-girl was to perform more wonders.

at this point socrates addressed the man of syracuse: it seems i am
likely to deserve the title which you gave me of a thinker in good
earnest. just now i am speculating by what means your boy and girl may
pass a happy time, and we spectators still derive the greatest pleasure
from beholding them; and this, i take it, is precisely what you would
yourself most wish. now i maintain, that throwing somersaults in and out
of swords is a display of danger uncongenial to a banquet. and as for
writing and reading on a wheel that all the while keeps whirling, i do
not deny the wonder of it, but what pleasure such a marvel can present,
i cannot for the life of me discover. nor do i see how it is a whit more
charming to watch these fair young people twisting about their bodies
and imitating wheels than to behold them peacefully reposing.

we need not fare far afield to light on marvels, if that is our object.
all about us here is full of marvel; we can begin at once by wondering,
why it is the candle gives a light by dint of its bright flame, while
side by side with it the bright bronze vessel gives no light, but shows
within itself those other objects mirrored. (1) or, how is it that oil,
being moist and liquid, keeps that flame ablaze, but water, just because
it is liquid, quenches fire. but no more do these same marvels tend to
promote the object of the wine-cup. (2)

 (1) cf. "mem." iv. vii. 7. socrates' criticism of anaxagoras' theory
    with regard to the sun.

 (2) lit. "work to the same end as wine."

but now, supposing your young people yonder were to tread a measure to
the flute, some pantomime in dance, like those which the graces and the
hours with the nymphs are made to tread in pictures, (3) i think they
would spend a far more happy time themselves, and our banquet would at
once assume a grace and charm unlooked for.

 (3) cf. plat. "laws," vii. 815 c; hor. "carm." i. 4. 6:

iunctaeque nymphis gratiae decentes alterno terram quatiunt pede.

the graces and the nymphs, together knit, with rhythmic feet the meadow
beat (conington).

    ib. iv. 7. 5.

the syracusan caught the notion readily.

by all that's holy, socrates (he cried), a capital suggestion, and for
my part, i warrant you, i will put a piece upon the stage, which will
delight you, one and all.



viii

with these words the syracusan made his exit, bent on organising his
performance. (1) as soon as he was gone, socrates once more essayed a
novel argument. (2) he thus addressed them:

 (1) {sunekroteito}, "on the composition of his piece." al. "amidst a
    round of plaudits."

 (2) "struck the keynote of a novel theme." cf. plat. "symp." 177 e.

it were but reasonable, sirs, on our part not to ignore the mighty
power here present, (3) a divinity in point of age coequal with the
everlasting gods, yet in outward form the youngest, (4) who in magnitude
embraces all things, and yet his shrine is planted in the soul of man.
love (5) is his name! and least of all should we forget him who are one
and all votaries of this god. (6) for myself i cannot name the time at
which i have not been in love with some one. (7) and charmides here has,
to my knowledge, captivated many a lover, while his own soul has gone
out in longing for the love of not a few himself. (8) so it is with
critobulus also; the beloved of yesterday is become the lover of to-day.
ay, and niceratus, as i am told, adores his wife, and is by her adored.
(9) as to hermogenes, which of us needs to be told (10) that the soul
of this fond lover is consumed with passion for a fair ideal--call it by
what name you will--the spirit blent of nobleness and beauty. (11) see
you not what chaste severity dwells on his brow; (12) how tranquil
his gaze; (13) how moderate his words; how gentle his intonation; now
radiant his whole character. and if he enjoys the friendship of the most
holy gods, he keeps a place in his regard for us poor mortals. but how
is it that you alone, antisthenes, you misanthrope, love nobody?

 (3) cf. shelley, "hymn to intellectual beauty":

the awful shadow of some unseen power floats, though unseen, among
us....

 (4) reading with l. d. after blomfield (aesch. "ag." p. 304),
    {idrumenou}, or if as vulg. {isoumenou}, transl. "but in soul is
    fashioned like to mortal man."

 (5) "eros."

 (6) or, "who are each and all of us members of his band." for
    {thiasotai} cf. aristot. "eth. n." viii. 9. 5; aristoph. "frogs,"
    327.

 (7) cf. plat. "symp." 177 d: "no one will vote against you,
    erysimachus, said socrates; on the only subject  ({ta erotika}) of
    which i profess to have any knowledge, i certainly cannot refuse
    to speak, nor, i presume, agathon and pasuanias; and there can be
    no doubt of arisophanes, who is the constant servant of dionysus
    and aphrodite; nor will any one disagree of those i see around me"
    (jowett).

 (8) or, "has had many a passionate admirer, and been enamoured of more
    than one true love himself." see plat. "charm.," ad in.

 (9) for love and love-for-love, {eros} and {anteros}, see plat.
    "phaedr." 255 d. cf. aristot. "eth. n." ix. 1.

 (10) lit. "which of us but knows his soul is melting away with
    passion." cf. theocr. xiv. 26.

 (11) lit. "beautiful and gentle manhood."

 (12) lit. "how serious are his brows."

 (13) the phrases somehow remind one of sappho's famous ode:

{phainetai moi kenos isos theoisin emmen oner, ostis enantios toi
izanei, kai plasion adu phoneusas upakouei kai gelosas imeroen}.

    but there we must stop. hermogenes is a sort of sir percivale,
    "such a courtesy spake thro' the limbs and in the voice."

nay, so help me heaven! (he replied), but i do love most desperately
yourself, o socrates!

whereat socrates, still carrying on the jest, with a coy, coquettish
air, (14) replied: yes; only please do not bother me at present. i have
other things to do, you see.

 (14) al. "like a true coquet." cf. plat. "phaedr." 228 c.

antisthenes replied: how absolutely true to your own character, arch
go-between! (15) it is always either your familiar oracle won't suffer
you, that's your pretext, and so you can't converse with me; or you are
bent upon something or somebody else.

 (15) see "mem." iii. xi. 14.

then socrates: for heaven's sake, don't carbonado (16) me, antisthenes,
that's all. any other savagery on your part i can stand, and will stand,
as a lover should. however (he added), the less we say about your love
the better, since it is clearly an attachment not to my soul, but to my
lovely person.

 (16) or, "tear and scratch me."

and then, turning to callias: and that you, callias, do love autolycus,
this whole city knows and half the world besides, (17) if i am not
mistaken; and the reason is that you are both sons of famous fathers,
and yourselves illustrious. for my part i have ever admired your nature,
but now much more so, when i see that you are in love with one who does
not wanton in luxury or languish in effeminacy, (18) but who displays to
all his strength, his hardihood, his courage, and sobriety of soul.
to be enamoured of such qualities as these is a proof itself of a true
lover's nature.

 (17) lit. "many a foreign visitor likewise."

 (18) see the attic type of character, as drawn by pericles, thuc. ii.
    40.

whether indeed aphrodite be one or twain (19) in personality, the
heavenly and the earthly, i cannot tell, for zeus, who is one and
indivisible, bears many titles. (20) but this thing i know, that these
twain have separate altars, shrines, and sacrifices, (21) as befits
their nature--she that is earthly, of a lighter and a laxer sort; she
that is heavenly, purer and holier in type. and you may well conjecture,
it is the earthly goddess, the common aphrodite, who sends forth the
bodily loves; while from her that is named of heaven, ourania, proceed
those loves which feed upon the soul, on friendship and on noble deeds.
it is by this latter, callias, that you are held in bonds, if i mistake
not, love divine. (22) this i infer as well from the fair and noble
character of your friend, as from the fact that you invite his father to
share your life and intercourse. (23) since no part of these is hidden
from the father by the fair and noble lover.

 (19) for aphrodite ourania and pandemos see plat. "symp." 180.

 (20) lit. "that is believed to be the same." see cic. "de n. d." iii.
    16. cf. aesch. "prom." 210 (of themis and gaia), {pollon onomaton
    morphe mia}.

 (21) e.g. to aphrodite pandemos a white goat, {mekas leuke}, but to
    aphrodite ourania a heifer, and {thusiai nephaliai}, offerings
    without wine, i.e. of water, milk, and honey. schol. to soph.
    "oed. col." 100; lucian, lxvii. "dial. mer." 7. 1.

 (22) lit. "by eros."

 (23) cf. plat. "prot." 318 a; aristoph. "thesmoph." 21, "learned
    conversazioni."

hermogenes broke in: by hera, socrates, i much admire you for many
things, and now to see how in the act of gratifying callias you are
training him in duty and true excellence. (24)

 (24) lit. "teaching him what sort of man he ought to be." this, as we
    know, is the very heart and essence of the socratic (= {xs})
    method. see "mem." i. ii. 3.

why, yes (he said), if only that his cup of happiness may overflow, i
wish to testify to him how far the love of soul is better than the love
of body.

without friendship, (25) as we full well know, there is no society of
any worth. and this friendship, what is it? on the part of those whose
admiration (26) is bestowed upon the inner disposition, it is well named
a sweet and voluntary compulsion. but among those whose desire (26) is
for the body, there are not a few who blame, nay hate, the ways of their
beloved ones. and even where attachment (26) clings to both, (27) even
so the bloom of beauty after all does quickly reach its prime; the
flower withers, and when that fails, the affection which was based upon
it must also wither up and perish. but the soul, with every step she
makes in her onward course towards deeper wisdom, grows ever worthier of
love.

 (25) lit. "that without love no intercourse is worth regarding, we all
    know."

 (26) n.b.--{agamenon, epithumounton, sterxosi}. here, as often, the
    author seems to have studied the {orthoepeia} of prodicus. see
    "mem." ii. i. 24.

 (27) i.e. "body and character."

ay, and in the enjoyment of external beauty a sort of surfeit is
engendered. just as the eater's appetite palls through repletion with
regard to meats, (28) so will the feelings of a lover towards his idol.
but the soul's attachment, owing to its purity, knows no satiety.
(29) yet not therefore, as a man might fondly deem, has it less of the
character of loveliness. (30) but very clearly herein is our prayer
fulfilled, in which we beg the goddess to grant us words and deeds that
bear the impress of her own true loveliness. (31)

 (28) cf. "mem." iii. xi. 13.

 (29) lit. "is more insatiate." cf. charles wesley's hymn:

o love divine, how sweet thou art! when shall i find my willing heart
all taken up by thee?

 (30) lit. "is she, the soul, more separate from aphrodite."

 (31) or, "stamped with the image of aphrodite." zeune cf. lucr. i. 24,
    addressing venus, "te sociam studeo scribendis versibus esse," "i
    would have thee for a helpmate in writing the verses..."; and
    below, 28, "quo magis aeternum da dictis, diva, leporem,"
    "wherefore all the more, o lady, lend my lays an ever-living
    charm" (h. a. j. munro).

that a soul whose bloom is visible alike in beauty of external form,
free and unfettered, and an inner disposition, bashful, generous; a
spirit (32) at once imperial and affable, (33) born to rule among its
fellows--that such a being will, of course, admire and fondly cling to
his beloved, is a thesis which needs no further argument on my part.
rather i will essay to teach you, how it is natural that this same type
of lover should in turn be loved by his soul's idol. (34)

 (32) cf. plat. "phaedr." 252 e.

 (33) the epithet {philophron} occurs "mem." iii. i. 6, of a general;
    ib. iii. v. 3 (according to the vulg. reading), of the athenians.

 (34) or, "the boy whom he cherishes."

how, in the first place, is it possible for him to hate a lover who,
he knows, regards him as both beautiful and good? (35) and, in the next
place, one who, it is clear, is far more anxious to promote the fair
estate of him he loves (36) than to indulge his selfish joys? and above
all, when he has faith and trust that neither dereliction, (37) nor
loss of beauty through sickness, nor aught else, will diminish their
affection.

 (35) or, "perfection."

 (36) lit. "the boy."

 (37) reading {en para ti poiese}. al. "come what come may," lit. "no
    alteration"; or if reading {parebese} transl. "although his may of
    youth should pass, and sickness should mar his features, the tie
    of friendship will not be weakened."

if, then, they own a mutual devotion, (38) how can it but be, they will
take delight in gazing each into the other's eyes, hold kindly converse,
trust and be trusted, have forethought for each other, in success
rejoice together, in misfortune share their troubles; and so long as
health endures make merry cheer, day in day out; or if either of
them should fall on sickness, then will their intercourse be yet more
constant; and if they cared for one another face to face, much more will
they care when parted. (39) are not all these the outward tokens of true
loveliness? (40) in the exercise of such sweet offices, at any rate,
they show their passion for holy friendship's state, and prove its
bliss, continuously pacing life's path from youth to eld.

 (38) for beauty of style (in the original) zeune cf. "mem." ii. vi. 28
    foll.; iii. xi. 10.

 (39) "albeit absent from one another in the body, they are more
    present in the soul." cf. virg. "aen." iv. 83, "illum absens
    absentem auditque videtque."

 (40) or, "bear the stamp of aphrodite."

but the lover who depends upon the body, (41) what of him? first, why
should love-for-love be given to such a lover? because, forsooth, he
bestows upon himself what he desires, and upon his minion things of dire
reproach? or that what he hastens to exact, infallibly must separate
that other from his nearest friends?

 (41) or, "is wholly taken up with." cf. plat. "laws," 831 c.

if it be pleaded that persuasion is his instrument, not violence; is
that no reason rather for a deeper loathing? since he who uses violence
(42) at any rate declares himself in his true colours as a villain,
while the tempter corrupts the soul of him who yields to his
persuasions.

 (42) cf. "hiero," iii. 3; "cyrop." iii. i. 39.

ay, and how should he who traffics with his beauty love the purchaser,
any more than he who keeps a stall in the market-place and vends to the
highest bidder? love springs not up, i trow, because the one is in his
prime, and the other's bloom is withered, because fair is mated with
what is not fair, and hot lips are pressed to cold. between man and
woman it is different. there the wife at any rate shares with her
husband in their nuptial joys; but here conversely, the one is sober and
with unimpassioned eye regards his fellow, who is drunken with the wine
of passion. (43)

 (43) lit. "by aphrodite." cf. plat. "phaedr." 240, "but the lover
   ... when he is drunk" (jowett); "symp." 214 c.

wherefore it is no marvel if, beholding, there springs up in his breast
the bitterest contempt and scorn for such a lover. search and you shall
find that nothing harsh was ever yet engendered by attachment based on
moral qualities; whilst shameless intercourse, time out of mind, has
been the source of countless hateful and unhallowed deeds. (44)

 (44) zeune cf. ael. "v. h." viii. 9, re archelaus king of macedon,
    concerning whom aristotle, "pol." v. 10. 1311 b: "many
    conspiracies have originated in shameful attempts made by
    sovereigns on the persons of their subjects. such was the attack
    of crataeus upon archelaus," etc. (jowett).

i have next to show that the society of him whose love is of the body,
not the soul, is in itself illiberal. the true educator who trains
another in the path of virtue, who will teach us excellence, whether
of speech or conduct, (45) may well be honoured, even as cheiron and
phoenix (46) were honoured by achilles. but what can he expect, who
stretches forth an eager hand to clutch the body, save to be treated
(47) as a beggar? that is his character; for ever cringing and
petitioning a kiss, or some other soft caress, (48) this sorry suitor
dogs his victims.

 (45) phoenix addresses achilles, "il." ix. 443:

{muthon te reter' emenai, prektera te ergon}

therefore sent he (peleus) me to thee to teach thee all things, to be
both a speaker of words and a doer of deeds (w. leaf).

 (46) see "il." xi. 831; "hunting," ch. i., as to cheiron and his
    scholars, the last of whom is achilles.

 (47) {an periepoito}. "he will be scurvily treated." cf. "hell." iii.
    i. 19.

 (48) cf. "mem." i. ii. 29.

if my language has a touch of turbulence, (49) do not marvel: partly the
wine exalts me; partly that love which ever dwells within my heart
of hearts now pricks me forward to use great boldness of speech (50)
against his base antagonist. why, yes indeed, it seems to me that he who
fixes his mind on outward beauty is like a man who has taken a farm on
a short lease. he shows no anxiety to improve its value; his sole object
being to take off it the largest crops he can himself. but he whose
heart is set on loyal friendship resembles rather a man who has a
farmstead of his own. at any rate, he scours the wide world to find what
may enhance the value of his soul's delight. (51)

 (49) or, "wantonness"; and for the apology see plat. "phaedr." 238: "i
    appear to be in a divine fury, for already i am getting into
    dithyrambics" (jowett).

 (50) lit. "to speak openly against that other sort of love which is
    its rival."

 (51) cf. michelet, i think, as to the french peasant-farmer regarding
    his property as "sa femme."

again, let us consider the effect upon the object of attachment. let him
but know his beauty is a bond sufficient to enthrall his lover, (52) and
what wonder if he be careless of all else and play the wanton. let him
discover, on the contrary, that if he would retain his dear affection
he must himself be truly good and beautiful, and it is only natural he
should become more studious of virtue. but the greatest blessing which
descends on one beset with eager longing to convert the idol of his soul
into a good man and true friend is this: necessity is laid upon himself
to practise virtue; since how can he hope to make his comrade good,
if he himself works wickedness? is it conceivable that the example he
himself presents of what is shameless and incontinent, (53) will serve
to make the beloved one temperate and modest?

 (52) or, "that by largess of beauty he can enthrall his lover."

 (53) see plat. "symp." 182 a, 192 a.

i have a longing, callias, by mythic argument (54) to show you that not
men only, but gods and heroes, set greater store by friendship of
the soul than bodily enjoyment. thus those fair women (55) whom zeus,
enamoured of their outward beauty, wedded, he permitted mortal to
remain; but those heroes whose souls he held in admiration, these he
raised to immortality. of whom are heracles and the dioscuri, and there
are others also named. (56) as i maintain, it was not for his body's
sake, but for his soul's, that ganymede (57) was translated to olympus,
as the story goes, by zeus. and to this his very name bears witness, for
is it not written in homer?

    and he gladdens ({ganutai}) to hear his voice. (58)

this the poet says, meaning "he is pleased to listen to his words."

 (54) or, "i have a desire to romance a little," "for your benefit to
    explain by legendary lore." cf. isocr. 120 c; plat. "rep." 392 b.

 (55) e.g. leda, danae, europa, alcmena, electra, latona, laodamia
    (zeune).

 (56) see "hunting," i.; "hell." vi. iii. 6.

 (57) see plat. "phaedr." 255 c; cic. "tusc." i. 26, "nec homerum audio
   ... divina mallem ad nos," a protest against anthropomorphism in
    religion.

 (58) not in "our" version of homer, but cf. "il." xx. 405, {ganutai de
    te tois 'enosikhthon}; "il." xiii. 493, {ganutai d' ara te phrena
    poimen}.

and again, in another passage he says:

    knowing deep devices ({medea}) in his mind, (59)

which is as much as to say, "knowing wise counsels in his mind."
ganymede, therefore, bears a name compounded of the two words, "joy" and
"counsel," and is honoured among the gods, not as one "whose body," but
"whose mind" "gives pleasure."

 (59) partly "il." xxiv. 674, {pukina phresi mede' ekhontes}; and "il."
    xxiv. 424, {phila phresi medea eidos}. cf. "od." vi. 192; xviii.
    67, 87; xxii. 476.

furthermore (i appeal to you, niceratus), (60) homer makes achilles
avenge patroclus in that brilliant fashion, not as his favourite, but
as his comrade. (61) yes, and orestes and pylades, (62) theseus
and peirithous, (63) with many another noble pair of demigods, are
celebrated as having wrought in common great and noble deeds, not
because they lay inarmed, but because of the admiration they felt for
one another.

 (60) as an authority on homer.

 (61) cf. plat. "symp." 179 e: "the notion that patroclus was the
    beloved one is a foolish error into which aeschylus has fallen,"
    etc. (in his "myrmidons"). see j. a. symonds, "the greek poets,"
    2nd series, "achilles," p. 66 foll.

 (62) concerning whom ovid ("pont." iii. 2. 70) says, "nomina fama
    tenet."

 (63) see plut. "thes." 30 foll. (clough, i. p. 30 foll.); cf. lucian,
    xli. "toxaris," 10.

nay, take the fair deeds of to-day: and you shall find them wrought
rather for the sake of praise by volunteers in toil and peril, than by
men accustomed to choose pleasure in place of honour. and yet pausanias,
(64) the lover of the poet agathon, (65) making a defence in behalf (66)
of some who wallow in incontinence, has stated that an army composed
of lovers and beloved would be invincible. (67) these, in his opinion,
would, from awe of one another, have the greatest horror of destruction.
a truly marvellous argument, if he means that men accustomed to turn
deaf ears to censure and to behave to one another shamelessly, are more
likely to feel ashamed of doing a shameful deed. he adduced as evidence
the fact that the thebans and the eleians (68) recognise the very
principle, and added: though they sleep inarmed, they do not scruple
to range the lover side by side with the beloved one in the field of
battle. an instance which i take to be no instance, or at any rate
one-sided, (69) seeing that what they look upon as lawful with us is
scandalous. (70) indeed, it strikes me that this vaunted battle-order
would seem to argue some mistrust on their part who adopt it--a
suspicion that their bosom friends, once separated from them, may forget
to behave as brave men should. but the men of lacedaemon, holding that
"if a man but lay his hand upon the body and for lustful purpose, he
shall thereby forfeit claim to what is beautiful and noble"--do, in
the spirit of their creed, contrive to mould and fashion their "beloved
ones" to such height of virtue, (71) that should these find themselves
drawn up with foreigners, albeit no longer side by side with their own
lovers, (72) conscience will make desertion of their present friends
impossible. self-respect constrains them: since the goddess whom the men
of lacedaemon worship is not "shamelessness," but "reverence." (73)

 (64) see cobet, "pros. xen." p. 15; plat. "protag." 315 d; ael. "v.
    h." ii. 21.

 (65) ib.; aristot. "poet." ix.

 (66) or, "in his 'apology' for."

 (67) plat. "symp." 179 e, puts the sentiment into the mouth of
    phaedrus: "and if there were only some way of contriving that a
    state or an army should be made up of lovers and their loves, they
    would be the very best governors of their own city, abstaining
    from all dishonour, and emulating one another in honour; and when
    fighting at one another's side, although not a mere handful, they
    would overcome the world. for what lover would not choose rather
    to be seen by all mankind than by his beloved, either when
    abandoning his post or throwing away his arms? he would be ready
    to die a thousand deaths rather than endure this. or would desert
    his beloved or fail him in the hour of danger? the veriest coward
    would become an inspired hero, equal to the bravest, at such a
    time; love would inspire him. that courage which, as homer says,
    the god breathes into the soul of heroes, love of his own nature
    infuses into the lover" (jowett). cf. "hunting," xii. 20; "anab."
    vii. iv. 7; "cyrop." vii. i. 30.

 (68) sc. in their institutions. cf. plat. "symp." 182, "in elis and
    boeotia"; "pol. lac." ii. 13; ael. "v. h." iii. 12, xiii. 5;
    athen. xiii. 2. for the theban sacred band see plut. "pelop." 18,
    19 (clough, ii. 218).

 (69) or, "not in pari materia, so to speak."

 (70) is not xenophon imputing himself to socrates? henkel cf. plat.
    "crito," 52 e. see newman, op. cit. i. 396.

 (71) or, "shape to so fine a manhood that..."

 (72) reading {en te aute taxei}. al. {... polei}, transl. "nor
    indeed in the same city." cf. "hell." v. iv. 33, re death of
    cleonymus at leuctra.

 (73) lit. "aidos not anaideia." see paus. "lac." xx. 10; "attica,"
    xvii. 1; cic. "de leg." ii. 11, a reference which i owe to m.
    eugene talbot, "xen." i. 236.

i fancy we should all agree with one another on the point in question,
if we thus approached it. ask yourself to which type of the two must
he (74) accord, to whom you would entrust a sum of money, make him
the guardian of your children, look to find in him a safe and sure
depositary of any favour? (75) for my part, i am certain that the very
lover addicted to external beauty would himself far sooner have his
precious things entrusted to the keeping of one who has the inward
beauty of the soul. (76)

 (74) he (the master-mistress of my passion).

 (75) {kharitas} = "kindly offices," beneficia. cf. "ages." iv. 4;
    "mem." iv. iv. 17. al. = delicias, "to deposit some darling
    object."

 (76) or, "some one truly lovable in soul and heart."

ah, yes! and you, my friend (he turned to callias), you have good reason
to be thankful to the gods who of their grace inspired you with love for
your autolycus. covetous of honour, (77) beyond all controversy, must he
be, who could endure so many toils and pains to hear his name proclaimed
(78) victor in the "pankration."

 (77) see "mem." ii. iii. 16; "isocr." 189 c, {ph. kai megalopsukhoi}.

 (78) i.e. "by the public herald."

but what if the thought arose within him: (79) his it is not merely
to add lustre to himself and to his father, but that he has ability,
through help of manly virtue, to benefit his friends and to exalt his
fatherland, by trophies which he will set up against our enemies in war,
(80) whereby he will himself become the admired of all observers, nay,
a name to be remembered among hellenes and barbarians. (81) would he not
in that case, think you, make much of (82) one whom he regarded as his
bravest fellow-worker, laying at his feet the greatest honours?

 (79) cf. theogn. 947:

{patrida kosmeso, liparen polin, out' epi demo trepsas out' adikois
andrasi peithomenos}.

 (80) who in 421 b.c. were of course the lacedaemonians and the allies.
    autolycus was killed eventually by the thirty to please the
    lacedaemonian harmost. see plut. "lysand." 15 (clough, iii. 120);
    paus. i. 18. 3; ix. 32. 8. cf. "hell." ii. iii. 14.

 (81) cf. "anab." iv. i. 20; "mem." iii. vi. 2.

 (82) {periepein}. cf. "cyrop." iv. iv. 12; "mem." ii. ix. 5.

if, then, you wish to be well-pleasing in his eyes, you had best inquire
by what knowledge themistocles (83) was able to set hellas free. you
should ask yourself, what keen wit belonged to pericles (83) that he was
held to be the best adviser of his fatherland. you should scan (84) the
field of history to learn by what sage wisdom solon (85) established
for our city her consummate laws. i would have you find the clue to
that peculiar training by which the men of lacedaemon have come to be
regarded as the best of leaders. (86) is it not at your house that their
noblest citizens are lodged as representatives of a foreign state? (87)

 (83) see "mem." ii. vi. 13; iii. vi. 2; iv. ii. 2.

 (84) for the diction, {skepteon, skepteon, aphreteon, ereuneteon,
    epistamenos, eidos, philosopheras}, xenophon's rhetorical style
    imitates the {orthoepeia} of prodicus.

 (85) see "econ." xiv. 4.

 (86) or, "won for themselves at all hands the reputation of noblest
    generalship." cf. "ages." i. 3; "pol. lac." xiv. 3.

 (87) reading as vulg. {proxenoi d' ei...} or if with schenkl,
    {proxenos d' ei...} transl. "you are their consul-general; at
    your house their noblest citizens are lodged from time to time."
    as to the office, cf. dem. 475. 10; 1237. 17; thuc. ii. 29;
    boeckh, "p. e. a." 50. callias appears as the lac. {proxenos}
    ("hell." v. iv. 22) 378 b.c., and at sparta, 371 b.c., as the
    peace commissioner ("hell." vi. iii. 3).

be sure that our state of athens would speedily entrust herself to your
direction were you willing. (88) everything is in your favour. you are
of noble family, "eupatrid" by descent, a priest of the divinities,
(89) and of erechtheus' famous line, (90) which with iacchus marched to
encounter the barbarian. (91) and still, at the sacred festival to-day,
it is agreed that no one among your ancestors has ever been more fitted
to discharge the priestly office than yourself; yours a person the
goodliest to behold in all our city, and a frame adapted to undergo
great toils.

 (88) cf. "mem." iii. vii.

 (89) i.e. demeter and core. callias (see "hell." vi. l.c.) was
    dadouchos (or torch-holder) in the mysteries.

 (90) or, "whose rites date back to erechtheus." cf. plat. "theag."
    122.

 (91) at salamis. the tale is told by herod. viii. 65, and plut.
    "themist." 15; cf. polyaen. "strat." iii. 11. 2. just as
    themistocles had won the battle of salamis by help of iacchus on
    the 16th boedromion, the first day of the mysteries, so chabrias
    won the sea-fight of naxos by help of the day itself, {to 'alade
    mustai}, 376 b.c.

but if i seem to any of you to indulge a vein more serious than befits
the wine-cup, marvel not. it has long been my wont to share our city's
passion for noble-natured souls, alert and emulous in pursuit of virtue.

he ended, and, while the others continued to discuss the theme of his
discourse, autolycus sat regarding callias. that other, glancing the
while at the beloved one, turned to socrates.

call. then, socrates, be pleased, as go-between, (92) to introduce me
to the state, that i may employ myself in state affairs and never lapse
from her good graces. (93)

 (92) lit. "as pander."

 (93) so critobulus in the conversation so often referred to. "mem."
    ii. vi.

never fear (he answered), if only people see your loyalty to virtue is
genuine, (94) not of mere repute. a false renown indeed is quickly seen
for what it is worth, being tested; but true courage (95) (save only
what some god hinder) perpetually amidst the storm and stress of
circumstance (96) pours forth a brighter glory.

 (94) see "mem." i. vii. 1, passim; ii. vi. 39; "econ." x. 9.

 (95) cf. thuc. ii. 42, {andragathia}, "true courage in the public
    service covers a multitude of private shortcomings."

 (96) {en tais praxesi}. cf. plat. "phaedr." 271 d, "in actual life."



ix

on such a note he ended his discourse.

at that, autolycus, whose hour for walking exercise had now come, arose.
his father, lycon, was about to leave the room along with him, but
before so doing, turned to socrates, remarking:

by hera, socrates, if ever any one deserved the appellation "beautiful
and good," (1) you are that man!

 (1) for {kalos ge kalathos} see "econ." vii. 2 and passim.

so the pair departed. after they were gone, a sort of throne was first
erected in the inner room abutting on the supper chamber. then the
syracusan entered, with a speech:

with your good pleasure, sirs, ariadne is about to enter the bridal
chamber set apart for her and dionysus. anon dionysus will appear, fresh
from the table of the gods, wine-flushed, and enter to his bride. in the
last scene the two will play (2) with one another.

 (2) {paixountai}. the syracusan naturally uses the doric form. see
    cobet, "pros. xen." p. 16, note 23. rutherford, "n. phrynicus," p.
    91.

he had scarce concluded, when ariadne entered, attired like a bride. she
crossed the stage and sate herself upon the throne. meanwhile, before
the god himself appeared a sound of flutes was heard; the cadence of the
bacchic air proclaimed his coming.

at this point the company broke forth in admiration of the
ballet-master. for no sooner did the sound of music strike upon the ear
of ariadne than something in her action revealed to all the pleasure
which it caused her. she did not step forward to meet her lover, she did
not rise even from her seat; but the flutter of her unrest was plain to
see. (3)

 (3) lit. "the difficulty she had to keep so still was evident."

when dionysus presently caught sight of her he loved, lightly he danced
towards her, and with show of tenderest passion gently reclined upon her
knees; his arms entwined about her lovingly, and upon her lips he sealed
a kiss; (4)--she the while with most sweet bashfulness was fain to wind
responsive arms about her lover; till the banqueters, the while they
gazed all eyes, clapped hands and cried "encore!" but when dionysus rose
upon his feet, and rising lifted ariadne to her full height, the action
of those lovers as they kissed and fondled one another was a thing to
contemplate. (5) as to the spectators, they could see that dionysus was
indeed most beautiful, and ariadne like some lovely blossom; nor were
those mocking gestures, but real kisses sealed on loving lips; and so,
(6) with hearts aflame, they gazed expectantly. they could hear the
question asked by dionysus, did she love him? and her answer, as
prettily she swore she did. and withal so earnestly, not dionysus only,
but all present, had sworn an oath in common: the boy and girl were
verily and indeed a pair of happy lovers. so much less did they resemble
actors, trained to certain gestures, than two beings bent on doing what
for many a long day they had set their hearts on.

 (4) or, "and encircling his arms about her impressed upon her lips a
    kiss."

 (5) or, "then was it possible to see the more than mimic gestures."

 (6) or, "on the tiptoe of excitement." cf. "hell." iii. i. 14, iv. 2.

at last when these two lovers, caught in each other's arms, were seen to
be retiring to the nuptial couch, the members of the supper party turned
to withdraw themselves; and whilst those of them who were unmarried
swore that they would wed, those who were wedded mounted their horses
and galloped off to join their wives, in quest of married joys.

only socrates, and of the rest the few who still remained behind, anon
set off with callias, to see out lycon and his son, and share the walk.

and so this supper party, assembled in honour of autolycus, broke up.






        
            *** end of the project gutenberg ebook the symposium ***
        

    

updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenbergtm electronic works to protect the project gutenbergtm
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project
gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenbergtm license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenbergtm
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenbergtm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenbergtm electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. project gutenberg is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenbergtm
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (the
foundation or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenbergtm electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenbergtm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenbergtm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenbergtm name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenbergtm license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenbergtm work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenbergtm license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenbergtm work (any work
on which the phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase project gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenbergtm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase project
gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenbergtm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenbergtm license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenbergtm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenbergtm.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenbergtm license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenbergtm work in a format
other than plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenbergtm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original plain
vanilla ascii or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenbergtm license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenbergtm electronic works
provided that:

     you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenbergtm works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenbergtm trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.
    
     you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenbergtm
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenbergtm
        works.
    
     you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenbergtm works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenbergtm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenbergtm trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenbergtm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenbergtm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you as-is, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenbergtm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenbergtm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenbergtm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenbergtm work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenbergtm

project gutenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenbergtms
goals and ensuring that the project gutenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenbergtm and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundations ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your states laws.

the foundations business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenbergtm electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenbergtm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenbergtm ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenbergtm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenbergtm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.


