the project gutenberg ebook of the man from snowy river, by
andrew barton 'banjo' paterson

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: the man from snowy river

author: andrew barton 'banjo' paterson

posting date: july 11, 2008 [ebook #213]
release date: february, 1995
last updated: march 9, 2018

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the man from snowy river ***




produced by a. light, and sheridan ash





the man from snowy river and other verses

(second edition)

by andrew barton 'banjo' paterson

[australian poet, reporter -- 1864-1941.]


[note on text:  italicized stanzas will be indented 5 spaces.
italicized words or phrases will be capitalized.
lines longer than 75 characters have been broken according to metre,
and the continuation is indented two spaces.  also,
some obvious errors, after being confirmed against other sources,
have been corrected.]


[note on content:  banjo paterson and henry lawson were writing for
the sydney 'bulletin' in 1892 when lawson suggested a 'duel' of poetry
to increase the number of poems they could sell to the paper.
it was apparently entered into in all fun, though there are reports
that lawson was bitter about it later.  'in defence of the bush',
included in this selection, was one of paterson's replies to lawson.]


[the 1913 printing (sydney, fifty-third thousand) of the second edition
(first published in 1902) was used in the preparation of this etext.
first edition was first published in 1895.]




the man from snowy river and other verses

by a. b. paterson (the banjo)

with preface by rolf boldrewood





preface



it is not so easy to write ballads descriptive of the bushland of australia
as on light consideration would appear.  reasonably good verse
on the subject has been supplied in sufficient quantity.
but the maker of folksongs for our newborn nation requires
a somewhat rare combination of gifts and experiences.
dowered with the poet's heart, he must yet have passed his 'wander-jaehre'
amid the stern solitude of the austral waste -- must have ridden the race
in the back-block township, guided the reckless stock-horse
adown the mountain spur, and followed the night-long moving,
spectral-seeming herd 'in the droving days'.  amid such scarce
congenial surroundings comes oft that finer sense which renders visible
bright gleams of humour, pathos, and romance, which,
like undiscovered gold, await the fortunate adventurer.
that the author has touched this treasure-trove, not less delicately
than distinctly, no true australian will deny.  in my opinion
this collection comprises the best bush ballads written
since the death of lindsay gordon.

rolf boldrewood


a number of these verses are now published for the first time,
most of the others were written for and appeared in the bulletin
 (sydney, n.s.w.), and are therefore already widely known
to readers in australasia.

a. b. paterson






prelude



     i have gathered these stories afar,
      in the wind and the rain,
     in the land where the cattle camps are,
      on the edge of the plain.
     on the overland routes of the west,
      when the watches were long,
     i have fashioned in earnest and jest
      these fragments of song.

     they are just the rude stories one hears
      in sadness and mirth,
     the records of wandering years,
      and scant is their worth
     though their merits indeed are but slight,
      i shall not repine,
     if they give you one moment's delight,
      old comrades of mine.






contents with first lines:



     prelude
        i have gathered these stories afar,

     the man from snowy river
        there was movement at the station, for the word had passed around

     old pardon, the son of reprieve
        you never heard tell of the story?

     clancy of the overflow
        i had written him a letter which i had, for want of better

     conroy's gap
        this was the way of it, don't you know --

     our new horse
        the boys had come back from the races

     an idyll of dandaloo
        on western plains, where shade is not,

     the geebung polo club
        it was somewhere up the country, in a land of rock and scrub,

     the travelling post office
        the roving breezes come and go, the reed beds sweep and sway,

     saltbush bill
        now this is the law of the overland that all in the west obey,

     a mountain station
        i bought a run a while ago,

     been there before
        there came a stranger to walgett town,

     the man who was away
        the widow sought the lawyer's room with children three in tow,

     the man from ironbark
        it was the man from ironbark who struck the sydney town,

     the open steeplechase
        i had ridden over hurdles up the country once or twice,

     the amateur rider
        _him_ going to ride for us!  _him_ --
          with the pants and the eyeglass and all.

     on kiley's run
        the roving breezes come and go

     frying pan's theology
        scene:  on monaro.

     the two devines
        it was shearing-time at the myall lake,

     in the droving days
        'only a pound,' said the auctioneer,

     lost
        'he ought to be home,' said the old man,
          'without there's something amiss.

     over the range
        little bush maiden, wondering-eyed,

     only a jockey
        out in the grey cheerless chill of the morning light,

     how m'ginnis went missing
        let us cease our idle chatter,

     a voice from the town
        i thought, in the days of the droving,

     a bunch of roses
        roses ruddy and roses white,

     black swans
        as i lie at rest on a patch of clover

     the all right 'un
        he came from 'further out',

     the boss of the 'admiral lynch'
        did you ever hear tell of chili?  i was readin' the other day

     a bushman's song
        i'm travellin' down the castlereagh, and i'm a station hand,

     how gilbert died
        there's never a stone at the sleeper's head,

     the flying gang
        i served my time, in the days gone by,

     shearing at castlereagh
        the bell is set a-ringing, and the engine gives a toot,

     the wind's message
        there came a whisper down the bland between the dawn and dark,

     johnson's antidote
        down along the snakebite river, where the overlanders camp,

     ambition and art
        i am the maid of the lustrous eyes

     the daylight is dying
        the daylight is dying

     in defence of the bush
        so you're back from up the country, mister townsman, where you went,

     last week
        oh, the new-chum went to the back block run,

     those names
        the shearers sat in the firelight, hearty and hale and strong,

     a bush christening
        on the outer barcoo where the churches are few,

     how the favourite beat us
        'aye,' said the boozer, 'i tell you it's true, sir,

     the great calamity
        macfierce'un came to whiskeyhurst

     come-by-chance
        as i pondered very weary o'er a volume long and dreary --

     under the shadow of kiley's hill
        this is the place where they all were bred;

     jim carew
        born of a thoroughbred english race,

     the swagman's rest
        we buried old bob where the bloodwoods wave





the man from snowy river and other verses





the man from snowy river



   there was movement at the station, for the word had passed around
    that the colt from old regret had got away,
   and had joined the wild bush horses -- he was worth a thousand pound,
    so all the cracks had gathered to the fray.
   all the tried and noted riders from the stations near and far
    had mustered at the homestead overnight,
   for the bushmen love hard riding where the wild bush horses are,
    and the stock-horse snuffs the battle with delight.

   there was harrison, who made his pile when pardon won the cup,
    the old man with his hair as white as snow;
   but few could ride beside him when his blood was fairly up --
    he would go wherever horse and man could go.
   and clancy of the overflow came down to lend a hand,
    no better horseman ever held the reins;
   for never horse could throw him while the saddle-girths would stand,
    he learnt to ride while droving on the plains.

   and one was there, a stripling on a small and weedy beast,
    he was something like a racehorse undersized,
   with a touch of timor pony -- three parts thoroughbred at least --
    and such as are by mountain horsemen prized.
   he was hard and tough and wiry -- just the sort that won't say die --
    there was courage in his quick impatient tread;
   and he bore the badge of gameness in his bright and fiery eye,
    and the proud and lofty carriage of his head.

   but still so slight and weedy, one would doubt his power to stay,
    and the old man said, 'that horse will never do
   for a long and tiring gallop -- lad, you'd better stop away,
    those hills are far too rough for such as you.'
   so he waited sad and wistful -- only clancy stood his friend --
    'i think we ought to let him come,' he said;
   'i warrant he'll be with us when he's wanted at the end,
    for both his horse and he are mountain bred.

   'he hails from snowy river, up by kosciusko's side,
    where the hills are twice as steep and twice as rough,
   where a horse's hoofs strike firelight from the flint stones every stride,
    the man that holds his own is good enough.
   and the snowy river riders on the mountains make their home,
    where the river runs those giant hills between;
   i have seen full many horsemen since i first commenced to roam,
    but nowhere yet such horsemen have i seen.'

   so he went -- they found the horses by the big mimosa clump --
    they raced away towards the mountain's brow,
   and the old man gave his orders, 'boys, go at them from the jump,
    no use to try for fancy riding now.
   and, clancy, you must wheel them, try and wheel them to the right.
    ride boldly, lad, and never fear the spills,
   for never yet was rider that could keep the mob in sight,
    if once they gain the shelter of those hills.'

   so clancy rode to wheel them -- he was racing on the wing
    where the best and boldest riders take their place,
   and he raced his stock-horse past them, and he made the ranges ring
    with the stockwhip, as he met them face to face.
   then they halted for a moment, while he swung the dreaded lash,
    but they saw their well-loved mountain full in view,
   and they charged beneath the stockwhip with a sharp and sudden dash,
    and off into the mountain scrub they flew.

   then fast the horsemen followed, where the gorges deep and black
    resounded to the thunder of their tread,
   and the stockwhips woke the echoes, and they fiercely answered back
    from cliffs and crags that beetled overhead.
   and upward, ever upward, the wild horses held their way,
    where mountain ash and kurrajong grew wide;
   and the old man muttered fiercely, 'we may bid the mob good day,
    _no_ man can hold them down the other side.'

   when they reached the mountain's summit, even clancy took a pull,
    it well might make the boldest hold their breath,
   the wild hop scrub grew thickly, and the hidden ground was full
    of wombat holes, and any slip was death.
   but the man from snowy river let the pony have his head,
    and he swung his stockwhip round and gave a cheer,
   and he raced him down the mountain like a torrent down its bed,
    while the others stood and watched in very fear.

   he sent the flint stones flying, but the pony kept his feet,
    he cleared the fallen timber in his stride,
   and the man from snowy river never shifted in his seat --
    it was grand to see that mountain horseman ride.
   through the stringy barks and saplings, on the rough and broken ground,
    down the hillside at a racing pace he went;
   and he never drew the bridle till he landed safe and sound,
    at the bottom of that terrible descent.

   he was right among the horses as they climbed the further hill,
    and the watchers on the mountain standing mute,
   saw him ply the stockwhip fiercely, he was right among them still,
    as he raced across the clearing in pursuit.
   then they lost him for a moment, where two mountain gullies met
    in the ranges, but a final glimpse reveals
   on a dim and distant hillside the wild horses racing yet,
    with the man from snowy river at their heels.

   and he ran them single-handed till their sides were white with foam.
    he followed like a bloodhound on their track,
   till they halted cowed and beaten, then he turned their heads for home,
    and alone and unassisted brought them back.
   but his hardy mountain pony he could scarcely raise a trot,
    he was blood from hip to shoulder from the spur;
   but his pluck was still undaunted, and his courage fiery hot,
    for never yet was mountain horse a cur.

   and down by kosciusko, where the pine-clad ridges raise
    their torn and rugged battlements on high,
   where the air is clear as crystal, and the white stars fairly blaze
    at midnight in the cold and frosty sky,
   and where around the overflow the reedbeds sweep and sway
    to the breezes, and the rolling plains are wide,
   the man from snowy river is a household word to-day,
    and the stockmen tell the story of his ride.




old pardon, the son of reprieve



   you never heard tell of the story?
    well, now, i can hardly believe!
   never heard of the honour and glory
    of pardon, the son of reprieve?
   but maybe you're only a johnnie
    and don't know a horse from a hoe?
   well, well, don't get angry, my sonny,
    but, really, a young un should know.

   they bred him out back on the 'never',
    his mother was mameluke breed.
   to the front -- and then stay there -- was ever
    the root of the mameluke creed.
   he seemed to inherit their wiry
    strong frames -- and their pluck to receive --
   as hard as a flint and as fiery
    was pardon, the son of reprieve.

   we ran him at many a meeting
    at crossing and gully and town,
   and nothing could give him a beating --
    at least when our money was down.
   for weight wouldn't stop him, nor distance,
    nor odds, though the others were fast,
   he'd race with a dogged persistence,
    and wear them all down at the last.

   at the turon the yattendon filly
    led by lengths at the mile-and-a-half,
   and we all began to look silly,
    while _her_ crowd were starting to laugh;
   but the old horse came faster and faster,
    his pluck told its tale, and his strength,
   he gained on her, caught her, and passed her,
    and won it, hands-down, by a length.

   and then we swooped down on menindie
    to run for the president's cup --
   oh! that's a sweet township -- a shindy
    to them is board, lodging, and sup.
   eye-openers they are, and their system
    is never to suffer defeat;
   it's 'win, tie, or wrangle' -- to best 'em
    you must lose 'em, or else it's 'dead heat'.

   we strolled down the township and found 'em
    at drinking and gaming and play;
   if sorrows they had, why they drowned 'em,
    and betting was soon under way.
   their horses were good 'uns and fit 'uns,
    there was plenty of cash in the town;
   they backed their own horses like britons,
    and, lord! how _we_ rattled it down!

   with gladness we thought of the morrow,
    we counted our wagers with glee,
   a simile homely to borrow --
    'there was plenty of milk in our tea.'
   you see we were green; and we never
    had even a thought of foul play,
   though we well might have known that the clever
    division would 'put us away'.

   experience 'docet', they tell us,
    at least so i've frequently heard,
   but, 'dosing' or 'stuffing', those fellows
    were up to each move on the board:
   they got to his stall -- it is sinful
    to think what such villains would do --
   and they gave him a regular skinful
    of barley -- green barley -- to chew.

   he munched it all night, and we found him
    next morning as full as a hog --
   the girths wouldn't nearly meet round him;
    he looked like an overfed frog.
   we saw we were done like a dinner --
    the odds were a thousand to one
   against pardon turning up winner,
    'twas cruel to ask him to run.

   we got to the course with our troubles,
    a crestfallen couple were we;
   and we heard the 'books' calling the doubles --
    a roar like the surf of the sea;
   and over the tumult and louder
    rang 'any price pardon, i lay!'
   says jimmy, 'the children of judah
    are out on the warpath to-day.'

   three miles in three heats: -- ah, my sonny,
    the horses in those days were stout,
   they had to run well to win money;
    i don't see such horses about.
   your six-furlong vermin that scamper
    half-a-mile with their feather-weight up;
   they wouldn't earn much of their damper
    in a race like the president's cup.

   the first heat was soon set a-going;
    the dancer went off to the front;
   the don on his quarters was showing,
    with pardon right out of the hunt.
   he rolled and he weltered and wallowed --
    you'd kick your hat faster, i'll bet;
   they finished all bunched, and he followed
    all lathered and dripping with sweat.

   but troubles came thicker upon us,
    for while we were rubbing him dry
   the stewards came over to warn us:
    'we hear you are running a bye!
   if pardon don't spiel like tarnation
    and win the next heat -- if he can --
   he'll earn a disqualification;
    just think over _that_, now, my man!'

   our money all gone and our credit,
    our horse couldn't gallop a yard;
   and then people thought that _we_ did it!
    it really was terribly hard.
   we were objects of mirth and derision
    to folk in the lawn and the stand,
   and the yells of the clever division
    of 'any price pardon!' were grand.

   we still had a chance for the money,
    two heats still remained to be run;
   if both fell to us -- why, my sonny,
    the clever division were done.
   and pardon was better, we reckoned,
    his sickness was passing away,
   so he went to the post for the second
    and principal heat of the day.

   they're off and away with a rattle,
    like dogs from the leashes let slip,
   and right at the back of the battle
    he followed them under the whip.
   they gained ten good lengths on him quickly
    he dropped right away from the pack;
   i tell you it made me feel sickly
    to see the blue jacket fall back.

   our very last hope had departed --
    we thought the old fellow was done,
   when all of a sudden he started
    to go like a shot from a gun.
   his chances seemed slight to embolden
    our hearts; but, with teeth firmly set,
   we thought, 'now or never!  the old 'un
    may reckon with some of 'em yet.'

   then loud rose the war-cry for pardon;
    he swept like the wind down the dip,
   and over the rise by the garden,
    the jockey was done with the whip
   the field were at sixes and sevens --
    the pace at the first had been fast --
   and hope seemed to drop from the heavens,
    for pardon was coming at last.

   and how he did come!  it was splendid;
    he gained on them yards every bound,
   stretching out like a greyhound extended,
    his girth laid right down on the ground.
   a shimmer of silk in the cedars
    as into the running they wheeled,
   and out flashed the whips on the leaders,
    for pardon had collared the field.

   then right through the ruck he came sailing --
    i knew that the battle was won --
   the son of haphazard was failing,
    the yattendon filly was done;
   he cut down the don and the dancer,
    he raced clean away from the mare --
   he's in front!  catch him now if you can, sir!
    and up went my hat in the air!

   then loud from the lawn and the garden
    rose offers of 'ten to one _on!_'
   'who'll bet on the field?  i back pardon!'
    no use; all the money was gone.
   he came for the third heat light-hearted,
    a-jumping and dancing about;
   the others were done ere they started
    crestfallen, and tired, and worn out.

   he won it, and ran it much faster
    than even the first, i believe
   oh, he was the daddy, the master,
    was pardon, the son of reprieve.
   he showed 'em the method to travel --
    the boy sat as still as a stone --
   they never could see him for gravel;
    he came in hard-held, and alone.

       .   .   .   .   .

   but he's old -- and his eyes are grown hollow;
     like me, with my thatch of the snow;
   when he dies, then i hope i may follow,
    and go where the racehorses go.
   i don't want no harping nor singing --
    such things with my style don't agree;
   where the hoofs of the horses are ringing
    there's music sufficient for me.

   and surely the thoroughbred horses
    will rise up again and begin
   fresh races on far-away courses,
    and p'raps they might let me slip in.
   it would look rather well the race-card on
    'mongst cherubs and seraphs and things,
   'angel harrison's black gelding pardon,
    blue halo, white body and wings.'

   and if they have racing hereafter,
    (and who is to say they will not?)
   when the cheers and the shouting and laughter
    proclaim that the battle grows hot;
   as they come down the racecourse a-steering,
    he'll rush to the front, i believe;
   and you'll hear the great multitude cheering
    for pardon, the son of reprieve.




clancy of the overflow



   i had written him a letter which i had, for want of better
    knowledge, sent to where i met him down the lachlan, years ago,
   he was shearing when i knew him, so i sent the letter to him,
    just 'on spec', addressed as follows, 'clancy, of the overflow'.

   and an answer came directed in a writing unexpected,
    (and i think the same was written with a thumb-nail dipped in tar)
   'twas his shearing mate who wrote it, and verbatim i will quote it:
    'clancy's gone to queensland droving, and we don't know where he are.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   in my wild erratic fancy visions come to me of clancy
    gone a-droving 'down the cooper' where the western drovers go;
   as the stock are slowly stringing, clancy rides behind them singing,
    for the drover's life has pleasures that the townsfolk never know.

   and the bush hath friends to meet him, and their kindly voices greet him
    in the murmur of the breezes and the river on its bars,
   and he sees the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended,
    and at night the wond'rous glory of the everlasting stars.

       .   .   .   .   .

   i am sitting in my dingy little office, where a stingy
    ray of sunlight struggles feebly down between the houses tall,
   and the foetid air and gritty of the dusty, dirty city
    through the open window floating, spreads its foulness over all

   and in place of lowing cattle, i can hear the fiendish rattle
    of the tramways and the 'buses making hurry down the street,
   and the language uninviting of the gutter children fighting,
    comes fitfully and faintly through the ceaseless tramp of feet.

   and the hurrying people daunt me, and their pallid faces haunt me
    as they shoulder one another in their rush and nervous haste,
   with their eager eyes and greedy, and their stunted forms and weedy,
    for townsfolk have no time to grow, they have no time to waste.

   and i somehow rather fancy that i'd like to change with clancy,
    like to take a turn at droving where the seasons come and go,
   while he faced the round eternal of the cash-book and the journal --
    but i doubt he'd suit the office, clancy, of 'the overflow'.




conroy's gap



   this was the way of it, don't you know --
    ryan was 'wanted' for stealing sheep,
   and never a trooper, high or low,
    could find him -- catch a weasel asleep!
   till trooper scott, from the stockman's ford --
    a bushman, too, as i've heard them tell --
   chanced to find him drunk as a lord
    round at the shadow of death hotel.

   d'you know the place?  it's a wayside inn,
    a low grog-shanty -- a bushman trap,
   hiding away in its shame and sin
    under the shelter of conroy's gap --
   under the shade of that frowning range,
    the roughest crowd that ever drew breath --
   thieves and rowdies, uncouth and strange,
    were mustered round at the shadow of death.

   the trooper knew that his man would slide
    like a dingo pup, if he saw the chance;
   and with half a start on the mountain side
    ryan would lead him a merry dance.
   drunk as he was when the trooper came,
    to him that did not matter a rap --
   drunk or sober, he was the same,
    the boldest rider in conroy's gap.

   'i want you, ryan,' the trooper said,
    'and listen to me, if you dare resist,
   so help me heaven, i'll shoot you dead!'
    he snapped the steel on his prisoner's wrist,
   and ryan, hearing the handcuffs click,
    recovered his wits as they turned to go,
   for fright will sober a man as quick
    as all the drugs that the doctors know.

   there was a girl in that rough bar
    went by the name of kate carew,
   quiet and shy as the bush girls are,
    but ready-witted and plucky, too.
   she loved this ryan, or so they say,
    and passing by, while her eyes were dim
   with tears, she said in a careless way,
    'the swagman's round in the stable, jim.'

   spoken too low for the trooper's ear,
    why should she care if he heard or not?
   plenty of swagmen far and near,
    and yet to ryan it meant a lot.
   that was the name of the grandest horse
    in all the district from east to west
   in every show ring, on every course
    they always counted the swagman best.

   he was a wonder, a raking bay --
    one of the grand old snowdon strain --
   one of the sort that could race and stay
    with his mighty limbs and his length of rein.
   born and bred on the mountain side,
    he could race through scrub like a kangaroo,
   the girl herself on his back might ride,
    and the swagman would carry her safely through.

   he would travel gaily from daylight's flush
    till after the stars hung out their lamps,
   there was never his like in the open bush,
    and never his match on the cattle-camps.
   for faster horses might well be found
    on racing tracks, or a plain's extent,
   but few, if any, on broken ground
    could see the way that the swagman went.

   when this girl's father, old jim carew,
    was droving out on the castlereagh
   with conroy's cattle, a wire came through
    to say that his wife couldn't live the day.
   and he was a hundred miles from home,
    as flies the crow, with never a track,
   through plains as pathless as ocean's foam,
    he mounted straight on the swagman's back.

   he left the camp by the sundown light,
    and the settlers out on the marthaguy
   awoke and heard, in the dead of night,
    a single horseman hurrying by.
   he crossed the bogan at dandaloo,
    and many a mile of the silent plain
   that lonely rider behind him threw
    before they settled to sleep again.

   he rode all night and he steered his course
    by the shining stars with a bushman's skill,
   and every time that he pressed his horse
    the swagman answered him gamely still.
   he neared his home as the east was bright,
    the doctor met him outside the town:
   'carew!  how far did you come last night?'
    'a hundred miles since the sun went down.'

   and his wife got round, and an oath he passed,
    so long as he or one of his breed
   could raise a coin, though it took their last
    the swagman never should want a feed.
   and kate carew, when her father died,
    she kept the horse and she kept him well:
   the pride of the district far and wide,
    he lived in style at the bush hotel.

   such was the swagman; and ryan knew
    nothing about could pace the crack;
   little he'd care for the man in blue
    if once he got on the swagman's back.
   but how to do it?  a word let fall
    gave him the hint as the girl passed by;
   nothing but 'swagman -- stable-wall;
    'go to the stable and mind your eye.'

   he caught her meaning, and quickly turned
    to the trooper:  'reckon you'll gain a stripe
   by arresting me, and it's easily earned;
    let's go to the stable and get my pipe,
   the swagman has it.'  so off they went,
    and soon as ever they turned their backs
   the girl slipped down, on some errand bent
    behind the stable, and seized an axe.

   the trooper stood at the stable door
    while ryan went in quite cool and slow,
   and then (the trick had been played before)
    the girl outside gave the wall a blow.
   three slabs fell out of the stable wall --
    'twas done 'fore ever the trooper knew --
   and ryan, as soon as he saw them fall,
    mounted the swagman and rushed him through.

   the trooper heard the hoof-beats ring
    in the stable yard, and he slammed the gate,
   but the swagman rose with a mighty spring
    at the fence, and the trooper fired too late,
   as they raced away and his shots flew wide
    and ryan no longer need care a rap,
   for never a horse that was lapped in hide
    could catch the swagman in conroy's gap.

   and that's the story.  you want to know
    if ryan came back to his kate carew;
   of course he should have, as stories go,
    but the worst of it is, this story's true:
   and in real life it's a certain rule,
    whatever poets and authors say
   of high-toned robbers and all their school,
    these horsethief fellows aren't built that way.

   come back!  don't hope it -- the slinking hound,
    he sloped across to the queensland side,
   and sold the swagman for fifty pound,
    and stole the money, and more beside.
   and took to drink, and by some good chance
    was killed -- thrown out of a stolen trap.
   and that was the end of this small romance,
    the end of the story of conroy's gap.




our new horse



   the boys had come back from the races
    all silent and down on their luck;
   they'd backed 'em, straight out and for places,
    but never a winner they struck.
   they lost their good money on slogan,
    and fell, most uncommonly flat,
   when partner, the pride of the bogan,
    was beaten by aristocrat.

   and one said, 'i move that instanter
    we sell out our horses and quit,
   the brutes ought to win in a canter,
    such trials they do when they're fit.
   the last one they ran was a snorter --
    a gallop to gladden one's heart --
   two-twelve for a mile and a quarter,
    and finished as straight as a dart.

   'and then when i think that they're ready
    to win me a nice little swag,
   they are licked like the veriest neddy --
    they're licked from the fall of the flag.
   the mare held her own to the stable,
    she died out to nothing at that,
   and partner he never seemed able
    to pace it with aristocrat.

   'and times have been bad, and the seasons
    don't promise to be of the best;
   in short, boys, there's plenty of reasons
    for giving the racing a rest.
   the mare can be kept on the station --
    her breeding is good as can be --
   but partner, his next destination
    is rather a trouble to me.

   'we can't sell him here, for they know him
    as well as the clerk of the course;
   he's raced and won races till, blow him,
    he's done as a handicap horse.
   a jady, uncertain performer,
    they weight him right out of the hunt,
   and clap it on warmer and warmer
    whenever he gets near the front.

   'it's no use to paint him or dot him
    or put any 'fake' on his brand,
   for bushmen are smart, and they'd spot him
    in any sale-yard in the land.
   the folk about here could all tell him,
    could swear to each separate hair;
   let us send him to sydney and sell him,
    there's plenty of jugginses there.

   'we'll call him a maiden, and treat 'em
    to trials will open their eyes,
   we'll run their best horses and beat 'em,
    and then won't they think him a prize.
   i pity the fellow that buys him,
    he'll find in a very short space,
   no matter how highly he tries him,
    the beggar won't _race_ in a race.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   next week, under 'seller and buyer',
    appeared in the _daily gazette_:
   'a racehorse for sale, and a flyer;
    has never been started as yet;
   a trial will show what his pace is;
    the buyer can get him in light,
   and win all the handicap races.
    apply here before wednesday night.'

   he sold for a hundred and thirty,
    because of a gallop he had
   one morning with bluefish and bertie,
    and donkey-licked both of 'em bad.
   and when the old horse had departed,
    the life on the station grew tame;
   the race-track was dull and deserted,
    the boys had gone back on the game.

       .   .   .   .   .

   the winter rolled by, and the station
    was green with the garland of spring
   a spirit of glad exultation
    awoke in each animate thing.
   and all the old love, the old longing,
    broke out in the breasts of the boys,
   the visions of racing came thronging
    with all its delirious joys.

   the rushing of floods in their courses,
    the rattle of rain on the roofs
   recalled the fierce rush of the horses,
    the thunder of galloping hoofs.
   and soon one broke out:  'i can suffer
    no longer the life of a slug,
   the man that don't race is a duffer,
    let's have one more run for the mug.

   'why, _everything_ races, no matter
    whatever its method may be:
   the waterfowl hold a regatta;
    the 'possums run heats up a tree;
   the emus are constantly sprinting
    a handicap out on the plain;
   it seems like all nature was hinting,
    'tis time to be at it again.

   'the cockatoo parrots are talking
    of races to far away lands;
   the native companions are walking
    a go-as-you-please on the sands;
   the little foals gallop for pastime;
    the wallabies race down the gap;
   let's try it once more for the last time,
    bring out the old jacket and cap.

   'and now for a horse; we might try one
    of those that are bred on the place,
   but i think it better to buy one,
    a horse that has proved he can race.
   let us send down to sydney to skinner,
    a thorough good judge who can ride,
   and ask him to buy us a spinner
    to clean out the whole countryside.'

   they wrote him a letter as follows:
    'we want you to buy us a horse;
   he must have the speed to catch swallows,
    and stamina with it of course.
   the price ain't a thing that'll grieve us,
    it's getting a bad 'un annoys
   the undersigned blokes, and believe us,
    we're yours to a cinder, 'the boys'.'

   he answered:  'i've bought you a hummer,
    a horse that has never been raced;
   i saw him run over the drummer,
    he held him outclassed and outpaced.
   his breeding's not known, but they state he
    is born of a thoroughbred strain,
   i paid them a hundred and eighty,
    and started the horse in the train.'

   they met him -- alas, that these verses
    aren't up to the subject's demands --
   can't set forth their eloquent curses,
    _for partner was back on their hands_.
   they went in to meet him in gladness,
    they opened his box with delight --
   a silent procession of sadness
    they crept to the station at night.

   and life has grown dull on the station,
    the boys are all silent and slow;
   their work is a daily vexation,
    and sport is unknown to them now.
   whenever they think how they stranded,
    they squeal just like guinea-pigs squeal;
   they bit their own hook, and were landed
    with fifty pounds loss on the deal.




an idyll of dandaloo



   on western plains, where shade is not,
    'neath summer skies of cloudless blue,
   where all is dry and all is hot,
    there stands the town of dandaloo --
   a township where life's total sum
   is sleep, diversified with rum.

   it's grass-grown streets with dust are deep,
    'twere vain endeavour to express
   the dreamless silence of its sleep,
    its wide, expansive drunkenness.
   the yearly races mostly drew
   a lively crowd to dandaloo.

   there came a sportsman from the east,
    the eastern land where sportsmen blow,
   and brought with him a speedy beast --
    a speedy beast as horses go.
   he came afar in hope to 'do'
   the little town of dandaloo.

   now this was weak of him, i wot --
    exceeding weak, it seemed to me --
   for we in dandaloo were not
    the jugginses we seemed to be;
   in fact, we rather thought we knew
   our book by heart in dandaloo.

   we held a meeting at the bar,
    and met the question fair and square --
   'we've stumped the country near and far
    to raise the cash for races here;
   we've got a hundred pounds or two --
   not half so bad for dandaloo.

   'and now, it seems, we have to be
    cleaned out by this here sydney bloke,
   with his imported horse; and he
    will scoop the pool and leave us broke
   shall we sit still, and make no fuss
   while this chap climbs all over us?'

       .   .   .   .   .

   the races came to dandaloo,
    and all the cornstalks from the west,
   on ev'ry kind of moke and screw,
    came forth in all their glory drest.
   the stranger's horse, as hard as nails,
   look'd fit to run for new south wales.

   he won the race by half a length --
    _quite_ half a length, it seemed to me --
   but dandaloo, with all its strength,
    roared out 'dead heat!' most fervently;
   and, after hesitation meet,
   the judge's verdict was 'dead heat!'

   and many men there were could tell
    what gave the verdict extra force:
   the stewards, and the judge as well --
    they all had backed the second horse.
   for things like this they sometimes do
   in larger towns than dandaloo.

   they ran it off; the stranger won,
    hands down, by near a hundred yards
   he smiled to think his troubles done;
    but dandaloo held all the cards.
   they went to scale and -- cruel fate! --
   his jockey turned out under-weight.

   perhaps they'd tampered with the scale!
    i cannot tell.  i only know
   it weighed him _out_ all right.  i fail
    to paint that sydney sportsman's woe.
   he said the stewards were a crew
   of low-lived thieves in dandaloo.

   he lifted up his voice, irate,
    and swore till all the air was blue;
   so then we rose to vindicate
    the dignity of dandaloo.
   'look here,' said we, 'you must not poke
   such oaths at us poor country folk.'

   we rode him softly on a rail,
    we shied at him, in careless glee,
   some large tomatoes, rank and stale,
    and eggs of great antiquity --
   their wild, unholy fragrance flew
   about the town of dandaloo.

   he left the town at break of day,
    he led his race-horse through the streets,
   and now he tells the tale, they say,
    to every racing man he meets.
   and sydney sportsmen all eschew
   the atmosphere of dandaloo.




the geebung polo club



   it was somewhere up the country, in a land of rock and scrub,
   that they formed an institution called the geebung polo club.
   they were long and wiry natives from the rugged mountain side,
   and the horse was never saddled that the geebungs couldn't ride;
   but their style of playing polo was irregular and rash --
   they had mighty little science, but a mighty lot of dash:
   and they played on mountain ponies that were muscular and strong,
   though their coats were quite unpolished,
     and their manes and tails were long.
   and they used to train those ponies wheeling cattle in the scrub:
   they were demons, were the members of the geebung polo club.

   it was somewhere down the country, in a city's smoke and steam,
   that a polo club existed, called 'the cuff and collar team'.
   as a social institution 'twas a marvellous success,
   for the members were distinguished by exclusiveness and dress.
   they had natty little ponies that were nice, and smooth, and sleek,
   for their cultivated owners only rode 'em once a week.
   so they started up the country in pursuit of sport and fame,
   for they meant to show the geebungs how they ought to play the game;
   and they took their valets with them -- just to give their boots a rub
   ere they started operations on the geebung polo club.

   now my readers can imagine how the contest ebbed and flowed,
   when the geebung boys got going it was time to clear the road;
   and the game was so terrific that ere half the time was gone
   a spectator's leg was broken -- just from merely looking on.
   for they waddied one another till the plain was strewn with dead,
   while the score was kept so even that they neither got ahead.
   and the cuff and collar captain, when he tumbled off to die,
   was the last surviving player -- so the game was called a tie.

   then the captain of the geebungs raised him slowly from the ground,
   though his wounds were mostly mortal, yet he fiercely gazed around;
   there was no one to oppose him -- all the rest were in a trance,
   so he scrambled on his pony for his last expiring chance,
   for he meant to make an effort to get victory to his side;
   so he struck at goal -- and missed it -- then he tumbled off and died.

       .   .   .   .   .

   by the old campaspe river, where the breezes shake the grass,
   there's a row of little gravestones that the stockmen never pass,
   for they bear a crude inscription saying, 'stranger, drop a tear,
   for the cuff and collar players and the geebung boys lie here.'
   and on misty moonlit evenings, while the dingoes howl around,
   you can see their shadows flitting down that phantom polo ground;
   you can hear the loud collisions as the flying players meet,
   and the rattle of the mallets, and the rush of ponies' feet,
   till the terrified spectator rides like blazes to the pub --
   he's been haunted by the spectres of the geebung polo club.




the travelling post office



   the roving breezes come and go, the reed beds sweep and sway,
   the sleepy river murmurs low, and loiters on its way,
   it is the land of lots o' time along the castlereagh.

       .   .   .   .   .

   the old man's son had left the farm, he found it dull and slow,
   he drifted to the great north-west where all the rovers go.
   'he's gone so long,' the old man said, 'he's dropped right out of mind,
   but if you'd write a line to him i'd take it very kind;
   he's shearing here and fencing there, a kind of waif and stray,
   he's droving now with conroy's sheep along the castlereagh.

   'the sheep are travelling for the grass, and travelling very slow;
   they may be at mundooran now, or past the overflow,
   or tramping down the black soil flats across by waddiwong,
   but all those little country towns would send the letter wrong,
   the mailman, if he's extra tired, would pass them in his sleep,
   it's safest to address the note to 'care of conroy's sheep',
   for five and twenty thousand head can scarcely go astray,
   you write to 'care of conroy's sheep along the castlereagh'.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   by rock and ridge and riverside the western mail has gone,
   across the great blue mountain range to take that letter on.
   a moment on the topmost grade while open fire doors glare,
   she pauses like a living thing to breathe the mountain air,
   then launches down the other side across the plains away
   to bear that note to 'conroy's sheep along the castlereagh'.

   and now by coach and mailman's bag it goes from town to town,
   and conroy's gap and conroy's creek have marked it 'further down'.
   beneath a sky of deepest blue where never cloud abides,
   a speck upon the waste of plain the lonely mailman rides.
   where fierce hot winds have set the pine and myall boughs asweep
   he hails the shearers passing by for news of conroy's sheep.
   by big lagoons where wildfowl play and crested pigeons flock,
   by camp fires where the drovers ride around their restless stock,
   and past the teamster toiling down to fetch the wool away
   my letter chases conroy's sheep along the castlereagh.




saltbush bill



   now this is the law of the overland that all in the west obey,
   a man must cover with travelling sheep a six-mile stage a day;
   but this is the law which the drovers make, right easily understood,
   they travel their stage where the grass is bad,
     but they camp where the grass is good;
   they camp, and they ravage the squatter's grass till never a blade remains,
   then they drift away as the white clouds drift
     on the edge of the saltbush plains,
   from camp to camp and from run to run they battle it hand to hand,
   for a blade of grass and the right to pass on the track of the overland.
   for this is the law of the great stock routes,
     'tis written in white and black --
   the man that goes with a travelling mob must keep to a half-mile track;
   and the drovers keep to a half-mile track
     on the runs where the grass is dead,
   but they spread their sheep on a well-grassed run
     till they go with a two-mile spread.
   so the squatters hurry the drovers on from dawn till the fall of night,
   and the squatters' dogs and the drovers' dogs get mixed in a deadly fight;
   yet the squatters' men, though they hunt the mob,
     are willing the peace to keep,
   for the drovers learn how to use their hands
     when they go with the travelling sheep;
   but this is the tale of a jackaroo that came from a foreign strand,
   and the fight that he fought with saltbush bill, the king of the overland.

   now saltbush bill was a drover tough, as ever the country knew,
   he had fought his way on the great stock routes
     from the sea to the big barcoo;
   he could tell when he came to a friendly run
     that gave him a chance to spread,
   and he knew where the hungry owners were that hurried his sheep ahead;
   he was drifting down in the eighty drought
     with a mob that could scarcely creep,
   (when the kangaroos by the thousands starve,
     it is rough on the travelling sheep),
   and he camped one night at the crossing-place on the edge of the wilga run,
   'we must manage a feed for them here,' he said,
     'or the half of the mob are done!'
   so he spread them out when they left the camp wherever they liked to go,
   till he grew aware of a jackaroo with a station-hand in tow,
   and they set to work on the straggling sheep,
     and with many a stockwhip crack
   they forced them in where the grass was dead
     in the space of the half-mile track;
   so william prayed that the hand of fate might suddenly strike him blue
   but he'd get some grass for his starving sheep
     in the teeth of that jackaroo.
   so he turned and he cursed the jackaroo, he cursed him alive or dead,
   from the soles of his great unwieldy feet to the crown of his ugly head,
   with an extra curse on the moke he rode and the cur at his heels that ran,
   till the jackaroo from his horse got down and he went for the drover-man;
   with the station-hand for his picker-up,
     though the sheep ran loose the while,
   they battled it out on the saltbush plain in the regular prize-ring style.

   now, the new chum fought for his honour's sake
     and the pride of the english race,
   but the drover fought for his daily bread with a smile on his bearded face;
   so he shifted ground and he sparred for wind and he made it a lengthy mill,
   and from time to time as his scouts came in
     they whispered to saltbush bill --
   'we have spread the sheep with a two-mile spread,
     and the grass it is something grand,
   you must stick to him, bill, for another round
     for the pride of the overland.'
   the new chum made it a rushing fight, though never a blow got home,
   till the sun rode high in the cloudless sky
     and glared on the brick-red loam,
   till the sheep drew in to the shelter-trees and settled them down to rest,
   then the drover said he would fight no more and he gave his opponent best.

   so the new chum rode to the homestead straight
     and he told them a story grand
   of the desperate fight that he fought that day
     with the king of the overland.
   and the tale went home to the public schools
     of the pluck of the english swell,
   how the drover fought for his very life, but blood in the end must tell.
   but the travelling sheep and the wilga sheep
     were boxed on the old man plain.
   'twas a full week's work ere they drafted out and hunted them off again,
   with a week's good grass in their wretched hides,
     with a curse and a stockwhip crack,
   they hunted them off on the road once more
     to starve on the half-mile track.
   and saltbush bill, on the overland, will many a time recite
   how the best day's work that ever he did
     was the day that he lost the fight.




a mountain station



   i bought a run a while ago,
    on country rough and ridgy,
   where wallaroos and wombats grow --
    the upper murrumbidgee.
   the grass is rather scant, it's true,
    but this a fair exchange is,
   the sheep can see a lovely view
    by climbing up the ranges.

   and she-oak flat's the station's name,
    i'm not surprised at that, sirs:
   the oaks were there before i came,
    and i supplied the flat, sirs.
   a man would wonder how it's done,
    the stock so soon decreases --
   they sometimes tumble off the run
    and break themselves to pieces.

   i've tried to make expenses meet,
    but wasted all my labours,
   the sheep the dingoes didn't eat
    were stolen by the neighbours.
   they stole my pears -- my native pears --
    those thrice-convicted felons,
   and ravished from me unawares
    my crop of paddy-melons.

   and sometimes under sunny skies,
    without an explanation,
   the murrumbidgee used to rise
    and overflow the station.
   but this was caused (as now i know)
    when summer sunshine glowing
   had melted all kiandra's snow
    and set the river going.

   and in the news, perhaps you read:
    'stock passings.  puckawidgee,
   fat cattle:  seven hundred head
    swept down the murrumbidgee;
   their destination's quite obscure,
    but, somehow, there's a notion,
   unless the river falls, they're sure
    to reach the southern ocean.'

   so after that i'll give it best;
    no more with fate i'll battle.
   i'll let the river take the rest,
    for those were all my cattle.
   and with one comprehensive curse
    i close my brief narration,
   and advertise it in my verse --
    'for sale!  a mountain station.'




been there before



   there came a stranger to walgett town,
    to walgett town when the sun was low,
   and he carried a thirst that was worth a crown,
    yet how to quench it he did not know;
   but he thought he might take those yokels down,
   the guileless yokels of walgett town.

   they made him a bet in a private bar,
    in a private bar when the talk was high,
   and they bet him some pounds no matter how far
    he could pelt a stone, yet he could not shy
   a stone right over the river so brown,
   the darling river at walgett town.

   he knew that the river from bank to bank
    was fifty yards, and he smiled a smile
   as he trundled down, but his hopes they sank
    for there wasn't a stone within fifty mile;
   for the saltbush plain and the open down
   produce no quarries in walgett town.

   the yokels laughed at his hopes o'erthrown,
    and he stood awhile like a man in a dream;
   then out of his pocket he fetched a stone,
    and pelted it over the silent stream --
   he had been there before:  he had wandered down
   on a previous visit to walgett town.




the man who was away



   the widow sought the lawyer's room with children three in tow,
   she told the lawyer man her tale in tones of deepest woe.
   said she, 'my husband took to drink for pains in his inside,
   and never drew a sober breath from then until he died.

   'he never drew a sober breath, he died without a will,
   and i must sell the bit of land the childer's mouths to fill.
   there's some is grown and gone away, but some is childer yet,
   and times is very bad indeed -- a livin's hard to get.

   'there's min and sis and little chris, they stops at home with me,
   and sal has married greenhide bill that breaks for bingeree.
   and fred is drovin' conroy's sheep along the castlereagh,
   and charley's shearin' down the bland, and peter is away.'

   the lawyer wrote the details down in ink of legal blue --
   'there's minnie, susan, christopher, they stop at home with you;
   there's sarah, frederick, and charles, i'll write to them to-day,
   but what about the other one -- the one who is away?

   'you'll have to furnish his consent to sell the bit of land.'
   the widow shuffled in her seat, 'oh, don't you understand?
   i thought a lawyer ought to know -- i don't know what to say --
   you'll have to do without him, boss, for peter is away.'

   but here the little boy spoke up -- said he, 'we thought you knew;
   he's done six months in goulburn gaol -- he's got six more to do.'
   thus in one comprehensive flash he made it clear as day,
   the mystery of peter's life -- the man who was away.




the man from ironbark



   it was the man from ironbark who struck the sydney town,
   he wandered over street and park, he wandered up and down.
   he loitered here, he loitered there, till he was like to drop,
   until at last in sheer despair he sought a barber's shop.
   ''ere! shave my beard and whiskers off, i'll be a man of mark,
   i'll go and do the sydney toff up home in ironbark.'

   the barber man was small and flash, as barbers mostly are,
   he wore a strike-your-fancy sash, he smoked a huge cigar:
   he was a humorist of note and keen at repartee,
   he laid the odds and kept a 'tote', whatever that may be,
   and when he saw our friend arrive, he whispered 'here's a lark!
   just watch me catch him all alive, this man from ironbark.'

   there were some gilded youths that sat along the barber's wall,
   their eyes were dull, their heads were flat, they had no brains at all;
   to them the barber passed the wink, his dexter eyelid shut,
   'i'll make this bloomin' yokel think his bloomin' throat is cut.'
   and as he soaped and rubbed it in he made a rude remark:
   'i s'pose the flats is pretty green up there in ironbark.'

   a grunt was all reply he got; he shaved the bushman's chin,
   then made the water boiling hot and dipped the razor in.
   he raised his hand, his brow grew black, he paused awhile to gloat,
   then slashed the red-hot razor-back across his victim's throat;
   upon the newly shaven skin it made a livid mark --
   no doubt it fairly took him in -- the man from ironbark.

   he fetched a wild up-country yell might wake the dead to hear,
   and though his throat, he knew full well, was cut from ear to ear,
   he struggled gamely to his feet, and faced the murd'rous foe:
   'you've done for me! you dog, i'm beat! one hit before i go!
   i only wish i had a knife, you blessed murdering shark!
   but you'll remember all your life, the man from ironbark.'

   he lifted up his hairy paw, with one tremendous clout
   he landed on the barber's jaw, and knocked the barber out.
   he set to work with tooth and nail, he made the place a wreck;
   he grabbed the nearest gilded youth, and tried to break his neck.
   and all the while his throat he held to save his vital spark,
   and 'murder!  bloody murder!' yelled the man from ironbark.

   a peeler man who heard the din came in to see the show;
   he tried to run the bushman in, but he refused to go.
   and when at last the barber spoke, and said, ''twas all in fun --
   'twas just a little harmless joke, a trifle overdone.'
   'a joke!' he cried, 'by george, that's fine; a lively sort of lark;
   i'd like to catch that murdering swine some night in ironbark.'

   and now while round the shearing floor the list'ning shearers gape,
   he tells the story o'er and o'er, and brags of his escape.
   'them barber chaps what keeps a tote, by george, i've had enough,
   one tried to cut my bloomin' throat, but thank the lord it's tough.'
   and whether he's believed or no, there's one thing to remark,
   that flowing beards are all the go way up in ironbark.




the open steeplechase



   i had ridden over hurdles up the country once or twice,
   by the side of snowy river with a horse they called 'the ace'.
   and we brought him down to sydney, and our rider jimmy rice,
   got a fall and broke his shoulder, so they nabbed me in a trice --
   me, that never wore the colours, for the open steeplechase.

   'make the running,' said the trainer, 'it's your only chance whatever,
   make it hot from start to finish, for the old black horse can stay,
   and just think of how they'll take it, when they hear on snowy river
   that the country boy was plucky, and the country horse was clever.
   you must ride for old monaro and the mountain boys to-day.'

   'are you ready?' said the starter, as we held the horses back,
   all ablazing with impatience, with excitement all aglow;
   before us like a ribbon stretched the steeplechasing track,
   and the sun-rays glistened brightly on the chestnut and the black
   as the starter's words came slowly, 'are -- you -- ready?  go!'

   well, i scarcely knew we'd started, i was stupid-like with wonder
   till the field closed up beside me and a jump appeared ahead.
   and we flew it like a hurdle, not a baulk and not a blunder,
   as we charged it all together, and it fairly whistled under,
   and then some were pulled behind me and a few shot out and led.

   so we ran for half the distance, and i'm making no pretences
   when i tell you i was feeling very nervous-like and queer,
   for those jockeys rode like demons;
     you would think they'd lost their senses
   if you saw them rush their horses at those rasping five foot fences --
   and in place of making running i was falling to the rear.

   till a chap came racing past me on a horse they called 'the quiver',
   and said he, 'my country joker, are you going to give it best?
   are you frightened of the fences? does their stoutness make you shiver?
   have they come to breeding cowards by the side of snowy river?
   are there riders on monaro?  ----' but i never heard the rest.

   for i drove the ace and sent him just as fast as he could pace it,
   at the big black line of timber stretching fair across the track,
   and he shot beside the quiver.  'now,' said i, 'my boy, we'll race it.
   you can come with snowy river if you're only game to face it,
   let us mend the pace a little and we'll see who cries a crack.'

   so we raced away together, and we left the others standing,
   and the people cheered and shouted as we settled down to ride,
   and we clung beside the quiver.  at his taking off and landing
   i could see his scarlet nostril and his mighty ribs expanding,
   and the ace stretched out in earnest and we held him stride for stride.

   but the pace was so terrific that they soon ran out their tether --
   they were rolling in their gallop, they were fairly blown and beat --
   but they both were game as pebbles -- neither one would show the feather.
   and we rushed them at the fences, and they cleared them both together,
   nearly every time they clouted, but they somehow kept their feet.

   then the last jump rose before us, and they faced it game as ever --
   we were both at spur and whipcord, fetching blood at every bound --
   and above the people's cheering and the cries of 'ace' and 'quiver',
   i could hear the trainer shouting, 'one more run for snowy river.'
   then we struck the jump together and came smashing to the ground.

   well, the quiver ran to blazes, but the ace stood still and waited,
   stood and waited like a statue while i scrambled on his back.
   there was no one next or near me for the field was fairly slated,
   so i cantered home a winner with my shoulder dislocated,
   while the man that rode the quiver followed limping down the track.

   and he shook my hand and told me that in all his days he never
   met a man who rode more gamely, and our last set to was prime,
   and we wired them on monaro how we chanced to beat the quiver.
   and they sent us back an answer, 'good old sort from snowy river:
   send us word each race you start in and we'll back you every time.'




the amateur rider



   _him_ going to ride for us!  _him_ --
     with the pants and the eyeglass and all.
   amateur! don't he just look it -- it's twenty to one on a fall.
   boss must be gone off his head to be sending our steeplechase crack
   out over fences like these with an object like that on his back.

   ride!  don't tell _me_ he can ride.
     with his pants just as loose as balloons,
   how can he sit on his horse? and his spurs like a pair of harpoons;
   ought to be under the dog act, he ought, and be kept off the course.
   fall! why, he'd fall off a cart, let alone off a steeplechase horse.

       .   .   .   .   .

   yessir! the 'orse is all ready -- i wish you'd have rode him before;
   nothing like knowing your 'orse, sir, and this chap's a terror to bore;
   battleaxe always could pull, and he rushes his fences like fun --
   stands off his jump twenty feet, and then springs like a shot from a gun.

   oh, he can jump 'em all right, sir, you make no mistake, 'e's a toff;
   clouts 'em in earnest, too, sometimes,
     you mind that he don't clout you off --
   don't seem to mind how he hits 'em, his shins is as hard as a nail,
   sometimes you'll see the fence shake
     and the splinters fly up from the rail.

   all you can do is to hold him and just let him jump as he likes,
   give him his head at the fences, and hang on like death if he strikes;
   don't let him run himself out -- you can lie third or fourth in the race --
   until you clear the stone wall, and from that you can put on the pace.

   fell at that wall once, he did, and it gave him a regular spread,
   ever since that time he flies it -- he'll stop if you pull at his head,
   just let him race -- you can trust him --
     he'll take first-class care he don't fall,
   and i think that's the lot -- but remember,
     _he must have his head at the wall_.

       .   .   .   .   .

   well, he's down safe as far as the start,
     and he seems to sit on pretty neat,
   only his baggified breeches would ruinate anyone's seat --
   they're away -- here they come -- the first fence,
     and he's head over heels for a crown!
   good for the new chum, he's over, and two of the others are down!

   now for the treble, my hearty -- by jove, he can ride, after all;
   whoop, that's your sort -- let him fly them!
     he hasn't much fear of a fall.
   who in the world would have thought it?  and aren't they just going a pace?
   little recruit in the lead there will make it a stoutly-run race.

   lord!  but they're racing in earnest -- and down goes recruit on his head,
   rolling clean over his boy -- it's a miracle if he ain't dead.
   battleaxe, battleaxe, yet!  by the lord, he's got most of 'em beat --
   ho! did you see how he struck, and the swell never moved in his seat?

   second time round, and, by jingo! he's holding his lead of 'em well;
   hark to him clouting the timber!  it don't seem to trouble the swell.
   now for the wall -- let him rush it.  a thirty-foot leap, i declare --
   never a shift in his seat, and he's racing for home like a hare.

   what's that that's chasing him -- rataplan -- regular demon to stay!
   sit down and ride for your life now!
     oh, good, that's the style -- come away!
   rataplan's certain to beat you, unless you can give him the slip;
   sit down and rub in the whalebone now -- give him the spurs and the whip!

   battleaxe, battleaxe, yet -- and it's battleaxe wins for a crown;
   look at him rushing the fences, he wants to bring t'other chap down.
   rataplan never will catch him if only he keeps on his pins;
   now! the last fence! and he's over it!  battleaxe, battleaxe wins!

       .   .   .   .   .

   well, sir, you rode him just perfect --
     i knew from the first you could ride.
   some of the chaps said you couldn't, an' i says just like this a' one side:
   mark me, i says, that's a tradesman -- the saddle is where he was bred.
   weight! you're all right, sir, and thank you;
     and them was the words that i said.




on kiley's run



   the roving breezes come and go
                  on kiley's run,
   the sleepy river murmurs low,
   and far away one dimly sees
   beyond the stretch of forest trees --
   beyond the foothills dusk and dun --
   the ranges sleeping in the sun
                  on kiley's run.

   'tis many years since first i came
                  to kiley's run,
   more years than i would care to name
   since i, a stripling, used to ride
   for miles and miles at kiley's side,
   the while in stirring tones he told
   the stories of the days of old
                  on kiley's run.

   i see the old bush homestead now
                  on kiley's run,
   just nestled down beneath the brow
   of one small ridge above the sweep
   of river-flat, where willows weep
   and jasmine flowers and roses bloom,
   the air was laden with perfume
                  on kiley's run.

   we lived the good old station life
                  on kiley's run,
   with little thought of care or strife.
   old kiley seldom used to roam,
   he liked to make the run his home,
   the swagman never turned away
   with empty hand at close of day
                  from kiley's run.

   we kept a racehorse now and then
                  on kiley's run,
   and neighb'ring stations brought their men
   to meetings where the sport was free,
   and dainty ladies came to see
   their champions ride; with laugh and song
   the old house rang the whole night long
                  on kiley's run.

   the station hands were friends i wot
                  on kiley's run,
   a reckless, merry-hearted lot --
   all splendid riders, and they knew
   the 'boss' was kindness through and through.
   old kiley always stood their friend,
   and so they served him to the end
                  on kiley's run.

   but droughts and losses came apace
                  to kiley's run,
   till ruin stared him in the face;
   he toiled and toiled while lived the light,
   he dreamed of overdrafts at night:
   at length, because he could not pay,
   his bankers took the stock away
                  from kiley's run.

   old kiley stood and saw them go
                  from kiley's run.
   the well-bred cattle marching slow;
   his stockmen, mates for many a day,
   they wrung his hand and went away.
   too old to make another start,
   old kiley died -- of broken heart,
                  on kiley's run.

       .   .   .   .   .

   the owner lives in england now
                  of kiley's run.
   he knows a racehorse from a cow;
   but that is all he knows of stock:
   his chiefest care is how to dock
   expenses, and he sends from town
   to cut the shearers' wages down
                  on kiley's run.

   there are no neighbours anywhere
                  near kiley's run.
   the hospitable homes are bare,
   the gardens gone; for no pretence
   must hinder cutting down expense:
   the homestead that we held so dear
   contains a half-paid overseer
                  on kiley's run.

   all life and sport and hope have died
                  on kiley's run.
   no longer there the stockmen ride;
   for sour-faced boundary riders creep
   on mongrel horses after sheep,
   through ranges where, at racing speed,
   old kiley used to 'wheel the lead'
                  on kiley's run.

   there runs a lane for thirty miles
                  through kiley's run.
   on either side the herbage smiles,
   but wretched trav'lling sheep must pass
   without a drink or blade of grass
   thro' that long lane of death and shame:
   the weary drovers curse the name
                  of kiley's run.

   the name itself is changed of late
                  of kiley's run.
   they call it 'chandos park estate'.
   the lonely swagman through the dark
   must hump his swag past chandos park.
   the name is english, don't you see,
   the old name sweeter sounds to me
                  of 'kiley's run'.

   i cannot guess what fate will bring
                  to kiley's run --
   for chances come and changes ring --
   i scarcely think 'twill always be
   locked up to suit an absentee;
   and if he lets it out in farms
   his tenants soon will carry arms
                  on kiley's run.




frying pan's theology



   scene:  on monaro.
    _dramatis personae_:
   shock-headed blackfellow,
    boy (on a pony).
   snowflakes are falling
    so gentle and slow,
   youngster says, 'frying pan,
    what makes it snow?'
   frying pan confident
    makes the reply --
   'shake 'em big flour bag
    up in the sky!'
   'what! when there's miles of it!
    sur'ly that's brag.
   who is there strong enough
    shake such a bag?'
   'what parson tellin' you,
    ole mister dodd,
   tell you in sunday-school?
    big feller god!
   he drive his bullock dray,
    then thunder go,
   he shake his flour bag --
    tumble down snow!'




the two devines



   it was shearing-time at the myall lake,
    and there rose the sound thro' the livelong day
   of the constant clash that the shear-blades make
    when the fastest shearers are making play,
   but there wasn't a man in the shearers' lines
   that could shear a sheep with the two devines.

   they had rung the sheds of the east and west,
    had beaten the cracks of the walgett side,
   and the cooma shearers had giv'n them best --
    when they saw them shear, they were satisfied.
   from the southern slopes to the western pines
   they were noted men, were the two devines.

   'twas a wether flock that had come to hand,
    great struggling brutes, that the shearers shirk,
   for the fleece was filled with the grass and sand,
    and seventy sheep was a big day's work.
   'at a pound a hundred it's dashed hard lines
   to shear such sheep,' said the two devines.

   but the shearers knew that they'd make a cheque
    when they came to deal with the station ewes;
   they were bare of belly and bare of neck
    with a fleece as light as a kangaroo's.
   'we will show the boss how a shear-blade shines
   when we reach those ewes,' said the two devines.

   but it chanced next day when the stunted pines
    were swayed and stirred with the dawn-wind's breath,
   that a message came for the two devines
    that their father lay at the point of death.
   so away at speed through the whispering pines
   down the bridle track rode the two devines.

   it was fifty miles to their father's hut,
    and the dawn was bright when they rode away;
   at the fall of night when the shed was shut
    and the men had rest from the toilsome day,
   to the shed once more through the dark'ning pines
   on their weary steeds came the two devines.

   'well, you're back right sudden,' the super. said;
    'is the old man dead and the funeral done?'
   'well, no, sir, he ain't not exactly dead,
    but as good as dead,' said the eldest son --
   'and we couldn't bear such a chance to lose,
   so we came straight back to tackle the ewes.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   they are shearing ewes at the myall lake,
    and the shed is merry the livelong day
   with the clashing sound that the shear-blades make
    when the fastest shearers are making play,
   and a couple of 'hundred and ninety-nines'
   are the tallies made by the two devines.




in the droving days



   'only a pound,' said the auctioneer,
   'only a pound; and i'm standing here
   selling this animal, gain or loss.
   only a pound for the drover's horse;
   one of the sort that was never afraid,
   one of the boys of the old brigade;
   thoroughly honest and game, i'll swear,
   only a little the worse for wear;
   plenty as bad to be seen in town,
   give me a bid and i'll knock him down;
   sold as he stands, and without recourse,
   give me a bid for the drover's horse.'

   loitering there in an aimless way
   somehow i noticed the poor old grey,
   weary and battered and screwed, of course,
   yet when i noticed the old grey horse,
   the rough bush saddle, and single rein
   of the bridle laid on his tangled mane,
   straightway the crowd and the auctioneer
   seemed on a sudden to disappear,
   melted away in a kind of haze,
   for my heart went back to the droving days.

   back to the road, and i crossed again
   over the miles of the saltbush plain --
   the shining plain that is said to be
   the dried-up bed of an inland sea,
   where the air so dry and so clear and bright
   refracts the sun with a wondrous light,
   and out in the dim horizon makes
   the deep blue gleam of the phantom lakes.

   at dawn of day we would feel the breeze
   that stirred the boughs of the sleeping trees,
   and brought a breath of the fragrance rare
   that comes and goes in that scented air;
   for the trees and grass and the shrubs contain
   a dry sweet scent on the saltbush plain.
   for those that love it and understand,
   the saltbush plain is a wonderland.
   a wondrous country, where nature's ways
   were revealed to me in the droving days.

   we saw the fleet wild horses pass,
   and the kangaroos through the mitchell grass,
   the emu ran with her frightened brood
   all unmolested and unpursued.
   but there rose a shout and a wild hubbub
   when the dingo raced for his native scrub,
   and he paid right dear for his stolen meals
   with the drover's dogs at his wretched heels.
   for we ran him down at a rattling pace,
   while the packhorse joined in the stirring chase.
   and a wild halloo at the kill we'd raise --
   we were light of heart in the droving days.

   'twas a drover's horse, and my hand again
   made a move to close on a fancied rein.
   for i felt the swing and the easy stride
   of the grand old horse that i used to ride
   in drought or plenty, in good or ill,
   that same old steed was my comrade still;
   the old grey horse with his honest ways
   was a mate to me in the droving days.

   when we kept our watch in the cold and damp,
   if the cattle broke from the sleeping camp,
   over the flats and across the plain,
   with my head bent down on his waving mane,
   through the boughs above and the stumps below
   on the darkest night i could let him go
   at a racing speed; he would choose his course,
   and my life was safe with the old grey horse.
   but man and horse had a favourite job,
   when an outlaw broke from a station mob,
   with a right good will was the stockwhip plied,
   as the old horse raced at the straggler's side,
   and the greenhide whip such a weal would raise,
   we could use the whip in the droving days.

       .   .   .   .   .

   'only a pound!' and was this the end --
   only a pound for the drover's friend.
   the drover's friend that had seen his day,
   and now was worthless, and cast away
   with a broken knee and a broken heart
   to be flogged and starved in a hawker's cart.
   well, i made a bid for a sense of shame
   and the memories dear of the good old game.

   'thank you?  guinea! and cheap at that!
   against you there in the curly hat!
   only a guinea, and one more chance,
   down he goes if there's no advance,
   third, and the last time, one! two! three!'
   and the old grey horse was knocked down to me.
   and now he's wandering, fat and sleek,
   on the lucerne flats by the homestead creek;
   i dare not ride him for fear he'd fall,
   but he does a journey to beat them all,
   for though he scarcely a trot can raise,
   he can take me back to the droving days.




lost



   'he ought to be home,' said the old man, 'without there's something amiss.
   he only went to the two-mile -- he ought to be back by this.
   he _would_ ride the reckless filly, he _would_ have his wilful way;
   and, here, he's not back at sundown -- and what will his mother say?

   'he was always his mother's idol, since ever his father died;
   and there isn't a horse on the station that he isn't game to ride.
   but that reckless mare is vicious, and if once she gets away
   he hasn't got strength to hold her -- and what will his mother say?'

   the old man walked to the sliprail, and peered up the dark'ning track,
   and looked and longed for the rider that would never more come back;
   and the mother came and clutched him, with sudden, spasmodic fright:
   'what has become of my willie? -- why isn't he home to-night?'

   away in the gloomy ranges, at the foot of an ironbark,
   the bonnie, winsome laddie was lying stiff and stark;
   for the reckless mare had smashed him against a leaning limb,
   and his comely face was battered, and his merry eyes were dim.

   and the thoroughbred chestnut filly, the saddle beneath her flanks,
   was away like fire through the ranges to join the wild mob's ranks;
   and a broken-hearted woman and an old man worn and grey
   were searching all night in the ranges till the sunrise brought the day.

   and the mother kept feebly calling, with a hope that would not die,
   'willie! where are you, willie?'  but how can the dead reply;
   and hope died out with the daylight, and the darkness brought despair,
   god pity the stricken mother, and answer the widow's prayer!

   though far and wide they sought him, they found not where he fell;
   for the ranges held him precious, and guarded their treasure well.
   the wattle blooms above him, and the blue bells blow close by,
   and the brown bees buzz the secret, and the wild birds sing reply.

   but the mother pined and faded, and cried, and took no rest,
   and rode each day to the ranges on her hopeless, weary quest.
   seeking her loved one ever, she faded and pined away,
   but with strength of her great affection she still sought every day.

   'i know that sooner or later i shall find my boy,' she said.
   but she came not home one evening, and they found her lying dead,
   and stamped on the poor pale features, as the spirit homeward pass'd,
   was an angel smile of gladness -- she had found the boy at last.




over the range



   little bush maiden, wondering-eyed,
    playing alone in the creek-bed dry,
   in the small green flat on every side
    walled in by the moonbi ranges high;
   tell us the tale of your lonely life,
    'mid the great grey forests that know no change.
   'i never have left my home,' she said,
    'i have never been over the moonbi range.

   'father and mother are both long dead,
    and i live with granny in yon wee place.'
   'where are your father and mother?' we said.
    she puzzled awhile with thoughtful face,
   then a light came into the shy brown eye,
    and she smiled, for she thought the question strange
   on a thing so certain -- 'when people die
    they go to the country over the range.'

   'and what is this country like, my lass?'
    'there are blossoming trees and pretty flowers,
   and shining creeks where the golden grass
    is fresh and sweet from the summer showers.
   they never need work, nor want, nor weep;
    no troubles can come their hearts to estrange.
   some summer night i shall fall asleep,
    and wake in the country over the range.'

   child, you are wise in your simple trust,
    for the wisest man knows no more than you
   ashes to ashes, and dust to dust:
    our views by a range are bounded too;
   but we know that god hath this gift in store,
    that when we come to the final change,
   we shall meet with our loved ones gone before
    to the beautiful country over the range.




only a jockey

        'richard bennison, a jockey, aged 14, while riding william tell
   in his training, was thrown and killed.  the horse is luckily uninjured.'
   -- melbourne wire.



   out in the grey cheerless chill of the morning light,
    out on the track where the night shades still lurk;
   ere the first gleam of the sungod's returning light,
    round come the race-horses early at work.

   reefing and pulling and racing so readily,
    close sit the jockey-boys holding them hard,
   'steady the stallion there -- canter him steadily,
    don't let him gallop so much as a yard.'

   fiercely he fights while the others run wide of him,
    reefs at the bit that would hold him in thrall,
   plunges and bucks till the boy that's astride of him
    goes to the ground with a terrible fall.

   'stop him there!  block him there!  drive him in carefully,
    lead him about till he's quiet and cool.
   sound as a bell! though he's blown himself fearfully,
    now let us pick up this poor little fool.

   'stunned?  oh, by jove, i'm afraid it's a case with him;
    ride for the doctor! keep bathing his head!
   send for a cart to go down to our place with him' --
    no use!  one long sigh and the little chap's dead.

   only a jockey-boy, foul-mouthed and bad you see,
    ignorant, heathenish, gone to his rest.
   parson or presbyter, pharisee, sadducee,
    what did you do for him? -- bad was the best.

   negroes and foreigners, all have a claim on you;
    yearly you send your well-advertised hoard,
   but the poor jockey-boy -- shame on you, shame on you,
    'feed ye, my little ones' -- what said the lord?

   him ye held less than the outer barbarian,
    left him to die in his ignorant sin;
   have you no principles, humanitarian?
    have you no precept -- 'go gather them in?'

       .   .   .   .   .

   knew he god's name?  in his brutal profanity,
    that name was an oath -- out of many but one --
   what did he get from our famed christianity?
    where has his soul -- if he had any -- gone?

   fourteen years old, and what was he taught of it?
    what did he know of god's infinite grace?
   draw the dark curtain of shame o'er the thought of it,
    draw the shroud over the jockey-boy's face.




how m'ginnis went missing



   let us cease our idle chatter,
    let the tears bedew our cheek,
   for a man from tallangatta
    has been missing for a week.

   where the roaring flooded murray
    covered all the lower land,
   there he started in a hurry,
    with a bottle in his hand.

   and his fate is hid for ever,
    but the public seem to think
   that he slumbered by the river,
    'neath the influence of drink.

   and they scarcely seem to wonder
    that the river, wide and deep,
   never woke him with its thunder,
    never stirred him in his sleep.

   as the crashing logs came sweeping,
    and their tumult filled the air,
   then m'ginnis murmured, sleeping,
    ''tis a wake in ould kildare.'

   so the river rose and found him
    sleeping softly by the stream,
   and the cruel waters drowned him
    ere he wakened from his dream.

   and the blossom-tufted wattle,
    blooming brightly on the lea,
   saw m'ginnis and the bottle
    going drifting out to sea.




a voice from the town

        a sequel to [mowbray morris's] 'a voice from the bush'



   i thought, in the days of the droving,
    of steps i might hope to retrace,
   to be done with the bush and the roving
    and settle once more in my place.
   with a heart that was well nigh to breaking,
    in the long, lonely rides on the plain,
   i thought of the pleasure of taking
    the hand of a lady again.

   i am back into civilisation,
    once more in the stir and the strife,
   but the old joys have lost their sensation --
    the light has gone out of my life;
   the men of my time they have married,
    made fortunes or gone to the wall;
   too long from the scene i have tarried,
    and, somehow, i'm out of it all.

   for i go to the balls and the races
    a lonely companionless elf,
   and the ladies bestow all their graces
    on others less grey than myself;
   while the talk goes around i'm a dumb one
    'midst youngsters that chatter and prate,
   and they call me 'the man who was someone
    way back in the year sixty-eight.'

   and i look, sour and old, at the dancers
    that swing to the strains of the band,
   and the ladies all give me the lancers,
    no waltzes -- i quite understand.
   for matrons intent upon matching
    their daughters with infinite push,
   would scarce think him worthy the catching,
    the broken-down man from the bush.

   new partners have come and new faces,
    and i, of the bygone brigade,
   sharply feel that oblivion my place is --
    i must lie with the rest in the shade.
   and the youngsters, fresh-featured and pleasant,
    they live as we lived -- fairly fast;
   but i doubt if the men of the present
    are as good as the men of the past.

   of excitement and praise they are chary,
    there is nothing much good upon earth;
   their watchword is _nil admirari_,
    they are bored from the days of their birth.
   where the life that we led was a revel
    they 'wince and relent and refrain' --
   i could show them the road -- to the devil,
    were i only a youngster again.

   i could show them the road where the stumps are
    the pleasures that end in remorse,
   and the game where the devil's three trumps are,
    the woman, the card, and the horse.
   shall the blind lead the blind -- shall the sower
    of wind reap the storm as of yore?
   though they get to their goal somewhat slower,
    they march where we hurried before.

   for the world never learns -- just as we did,
    they gallantly go to their fate,
   unheeded all warnings, unheeded
    the maxims of elders sedate.
   as the husbandman, patiently toiling,
    draws a harvest each year from the soil,
   so the fools grow afresh for the spoiling,
    and a new crop of thieves for the spoil.

   but a truce to this dull moralising,
    let them drink while the drops are of gold,
   i have tasted the dregs -- 'twere surprising
    were the new wine to me like the old;
   and i weary for lack of employment
    in idleness day after day,
   for the key to the door of enjoyment
    is youth -- and i've thrown it away.




a bunch of roses



   roses ruddy and roses white,
    what are the joys that my heart discloses?
   sitting alone in the fading light
   memories come to me here to-night
    with the wonderful scent of the big red roses.

   memories come as the daylight fades
    down on the hearth where the firelight dozes;
   flicker and flutter the lights and shades,
   and i see the face of a queen of maids
    whose memory comes with the scent of roses.

   visions arise of a scene of mirth,
    and a ball-room belle that superbly poses --
   a queenly woman of queenly worth,
   and i am the happiest man on earth
    with a single flower from a bunch of roses.

   only her memory lives to-night --
    god in his wisdom her young life closes;
   over her grave may the turf be light,
   cover her coffin with roses white --
    she was always fond of the big white roses.

       .   .   .   .   .

   such are the visions that fade away --
    man proposes and god disposes;
   look in the glass and i see to-day
   only an old man, worn and grey,
    bending his head to a bunch of roses.




black swans



   as i lie at rest on a patch of clover
   in the western park when the day is done,
   i watch as the wild black swans fly over
   with their phalanx turned to the sinking sun;
   and i hear the clang of their leader crying
   to a lagging mate in the rearward flying,
   and they fade away in the darkness dying,
   where the stars are mustering one by one.

   oh! ye wild black swans, 'twere a world of wonder
   for a while to join in your westward flight,
   with the stars above and the dim earth under,
   through the cooling air of the glorious night.
   as we swept along on our pinions winging,
   we should catch the chime of a church-bell ringing,
   or the distant note of a torrent singing,
   or the far-off flash of a station light.

   from the northern lakes with the reeds and rushes,
   where the hills are clothed with a purple haze,
   where the bell-birds chime and the songs of thrushes
   make music sweet in the jungle maze,
   they will hold their course to the westward ever,
   till they reach the banks of the old grey river,
   where the waters wash, and the reed-beds quiver
   in the burning heat of the summer days.

   oh! ye strange wild birds, will ye bear a greeting
   to the folk that live in that western land?
   then for every sweep of your pinions beating,
   ye shall bear a wish to the sunburnt band,
   to the stalwart men who are stoutly fighting
   with the heat and drought and the dust-storm smiting,
   yet whose life somehow has a strange inviting,
   when once to the work they have put their hand.

   facing it yet!  oh, my friend stout-hearted,
   what does it matter for rain or shine,
   for the hopes deferred and the gain departed?
   nothing could conquer that heart of thine.
   and thy health and strength are beyond confessing
   as the only joys that are worth possessing.
   may the days to come be as rich in blessing
   as the days we spent in the auld lang syne.

   i would fain go back to the old grey river,
   to the old bush days when our hearts were light,
   but, alas! those days they have fled for ever,
   they are like the swans that have swept from sight.
   and i know full well that the strangers' faces
   would meet us now in our dearest places;
   for our day is dead and has left no traces
   but the thoughts that live in my mind to-night.

   there are folk long dead, and our hearts would sicken --
   we would grieve for them with a bitter pain,
   if the past could live and the dead could quicken,
   we then might turn to that life again.
   but on lonely nights we would hear them calling,
   we should hear their steps on the pathways falling,
   we should loathe the life with a hate appalling
   in our lonely rides by the ridge and plain.

       .   .   .   .   .

   in the silent park is a scent of clover,
   and the distant roar of the town is dead,
   and i hear once more as the swans fly over
   their far-off clamour from overhead.
   they are flying west, by their instinct guided,
   and for man likewise is his fate decided,
   and griefs apportioned and joys divided
   by a mighty power with a purpose dread.




the all right 'un



   he came from 'further out',
   that land of heat and drought
   and dust and gravel.
   he got a touch of sun,
   and rested at the run
   until his cure was done,
   and he could travel.

   when spring had decked the plain,
   he flitted off again
   as flit the swallows.
   and from that western land,
   when many months were spanned,
   a letter came to hand,
   which read as follows:

   'dear sir, i take my pen
   in hopes that all your men
   and you are hearty.
   you think that i've forgot
   your kindness, mr. scott,
   oh, no, dear sir, i'm not
   that sort of party.

   'you sometimes bet, i know,
   well, now you'll have a show
   the 'books' to frighten.
   up here at wingadee
   young billy fife and me
   we're training strife, and he
   is a all right 'un.

   'just now we're running byes,
   but, sir, first time he tries
   i'll send you word of.
   and running 'on the crook'
   their measures we have took,
   it is the deadest hook
   you ever heard of.

   'so when we lets him go,
   why, then, i'll let you know,
   and you can have a show
   to put a mite on.
   now, sir, my leave i'll take,
   yours truly, william blake.
   p.s. -- make no mistake,
   _he's a all right 'un_.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   by next week's _riverine_
   i saw my friend had been
   a bit too cunning.
   i read:  'the racehorse strife
   and jockey william fife
   disqualified for life --
   suspicious running.'

   but though they spoilt his game,
   i reckon all the same
   i fairly ought to claim
   my friend a white 'un.
   for though he wasn't straight,
   his deeds would indicate
   his heart at any rate
   was 'a all right 'un'.




the boss of the 'admiral lynch'



   did you ever hear tell of chili?  i was readin' the other day
   of president balmaceda and of how he was sent away.
   it seems that he didn't suit 'em -- they thought that they'd like a change,
   so they started an insurrection and chased him across the range.
   they seemed to be restless people -- and, judging by what you hear,
   they raise up these revolutions 'bout two or three times a year;
   and the man that goes out of office, he goes for the boundary _quick_,
   for there isn't no vote by ballot -- it's bullets that does the trick.
   and it ain't like a real battle, where the prisoners' lives are spared,
   and they fight till there's one side beaten
     and then there's a truce declared,

   and the man that has got the licking goes down like a blooming lord
   to hand in his resignation and give up his blooming sword,
   and the other man bows and takes it, and everything's all polite --
   this wasn't that kind of a picnic, this wasn't that sort of a fight.
   for the pris'ners they took -- they shot 'em;
     no odds were they small or great,
   if they'd collared old balmaceda, they reckoned to shoot him straight.
   a lot of bloodthirsty devils they were -- but there ain't a doubt
   they must have been real plucked 'uns -- the way that they fought it out,
   and the king of 'em all, i reckon, the man that could stand a pinch,
   was the boss of a one-horse gunboat.  they called her the 'admiral lynch'.

   well, he was for balmaceda, and after the war was done,
   and balmaceda was beaten and his troops had been forced to run,
   the other man fetched his army and proceeded to do things brown,
   he marched 'em into the fortress and took command of the town.
   cannon and guns and horses troopin' along the road,
   rumblin' over the bridges, and never a foeman showed
   till they came in sight of the harbour, and the very first thing they see
   was this mite of a one-horse gunboat a-lying against the quay,
   and there as they watched they noticed a flutter of crimson rag,
   and under their eyes he hoisted old balmaceda's flag.
   well, i tell you it fairly knocked 'em -- it just took away their breath,
   for he must ha' known if they caught him, 'twas nothin' but sudden death.
   an' he'd got no fire in his furnace, no chance to put out to sea,
   so he stood by his gun and waited with his vessel against the quay.

   well, they sent him a civil message to say that the war was done,
   and most of his side were corpses, and all that were left had run;
   and blood had been spilt sufficient, so they gave him a chance to decide
   if he'd haul down his bit of bunting and come on the winning side.
   he listened and heard their message, and answered them all polite,
   that he was a spanish hidalgo, and the men of his race _must_ fight!
   a gunboat against an army, and with never a chance to run,
   and them with their hundred cannon and him with a single gun:
   the odds were a trifle heavy -- but he wasn't the sort to flinch,
   so he opened fire on the army, did the boss of the 'admiral lynch'.

   they pounded his boat to pieces, they silenced his single gun,
   and captured the whole consignment, for none of 'em cared to run;
   and it don't say whether they shot him -- it don't even give his name --
   but whatever they did i'll wager that he went to his graveyard game.
   i tell you those old hidalgos so stately and so polite,
   they turn out the real maginnis when it comes to an uphill fight.
   there was general alcantara, who died in the heaviest brunt,
   and general alzereca was killed in the battle's front;
   but the king of 'em all, i reckon -- the man that could stand a pinch --
   was the man who attacked the army with the gunboat 'admiral lynch'.




a bushman's song



   i'm travellin' down the castlereagh, and i'm a station hand,
   i'm handy with the ropin' pole, i'm handy with the brand,
   and i can ride a rowdy colt, or swing the axe all day,
   but there's no demand for a station-hand along the castlereagh.

   so it's shift, boys, shift, for there isn't the slightest doubt
   that we've got to make a shift to the stations further out,
   with the pack-horse runnin' after, for he follows like a dog,
   we must strike across the country at the old jig-jog.

   this old black horse i'm riding -- if you'll notice what's his brand,
   he wears the crooked r, you see -- none better in the land.
   he takes a lot of beatin', and the other day we tried,
   for a bit of a joke, with a racing bloke, for twenty pounds a side.

   it was shift, boys, shift, for there wasn't the slightest doubt
   that i had to make him shift, for the money was nearly out;
   but he cantered home a winner, with the other one at the flog --
   he's a red-hot sort to pick up with his old jig-jog.

   i asked a cove for shearin' once along the marthaguy:
   'we shear non-union here,' says he.  'i call it scab,' says i.
   i looked along the shearin' floor before i turned to go --
   there were eight or ten dashed chinamen a-shearin' in a row.

   it was shift, boys, shift, for there wasn't the slightest doubt
   it was time to make a shift with the leprosy about.
   so i saddled up my horses, and i whistled to my dog,
   and i left his scabby station at the old jig-jog.

   i went to illawarra, where my brother's got a farm,
   he has to ask his landlord's leave before he lifts his arm;
   the landlord owns the country side -- man, woman, dog, and cat,
   they haven't the cheek to dare to speak without they touch their hat.

   it was shift, boys, shift, for there wasn't the slightest doubt
   their little landlord god and i would soon have fallen out;
   was i to touch my hat to him? -- was i his bloomin' dog?
   so i makes for up the country at the old jig-jog.

   but it's time that i was movin', i've a mighty way to go
   till i drink artesian water from a thousand feet below;
   till i meet the overlanders with the cattle comin' down,
   and i'll work a while till i make a pile, then have a spree in town.

   so, it's shift, boys, shift, for there isn't the slightest doubt
   we've got to make a shift to the stations further out;
   the pack-horse runs behind us, for he follows like a dog,
   and we cross a lot of country at the old jig-jog.




how gilbert died



   there's never a stone at the sleeper's head,
    there's never a fence beside,
   and the wandering stock on the grave may tread
    unnoticed and undenied,
   but the smallest child on the watershed
    can tell you how gilbert died.

   for he rode at dusk, with his comrade dunn
    to the hut at the stockman's ford,
   in the waning light of the sinking sun
    they peered with a fierce accord.
   they were outlaws both -- and on each man's head
    was a thousand pounds reward.

   they had taken toll of the country round,
    and the troopers came behind
   with a black that tracked like a human hound
    in the scrub and the ranges blind:
   he could run the trail where a white man's eye
    no sign of a track could find.

   he had hunted them out of the one tree hill
    and over the old man plain,
   but they wheeled their tracks with a wild beast's skill,
    and they made for the range again.
   then away to the hut where their grandsire dwelt,
    they rode with a loosened rein.

   and their grandsire gave them a greeting bold:
    'come in and rest in peace,
   no safer place does the country hold --
    with the night pursuit must cease,
   and we'll drink success to the roving boys,
    and to hell with the black police.'

   but they went to death when they entered there,
    in the hut at the stockman's ford,
   for their grandsire's words were as false as fair --
    they were doomed to the hangman's cord.
   he had sold them both to the black police
    for the sake of the big reward.

   in the depth of night there are forms that glide
    as stealthy as serpents creep,
   and around the hut where the outlaws hide
    they plant in the shadows deep,
   and they wait till the first faint flush of dawn
    shall waken their prey from sleep.

   but gilbert wakes while the night is dark --
    a restless sleeper, aye,
   he has heard the sound of a sheep-dog's bark,
    and his horse's warning neigh,
   and he says to his mate, 'there are hawks abroad,
    and it's time that we went away.'

   their rifles stood at the stretcher head,
    their bridles lay to hand,
   they wakened the old man out of his bed,
    when they heard the sharp command:
   'in the name of the queen lay down your arms,
    now, dunn and gilbert, stand!'

   then gilbert reached for his rifle true
    that close at his hand he kept,
   he pointed it straight at the voice and drew,
    but never a flash outleapt,
   for the water ran from the rifle breech --
    it was drenched while the outlaws slept.

   then he dropped the piece with a bitter oath,
    and he turned to his comrade dunn:
   'we are sold,' he said, 'we are dead men both,
    but there may be a chance for one;
   i'll stop and i'll fight with the pistol here,
    you take to your heels and run.'

   so dunn crept out on his hands and knees
    in the dim, half-dawning light,
   and he made his way to a patch of trees,
    and vanished among the night,
   and the trackers hunted his tracks all day,
    but they never could trace his flight.

   but gilbert walked from the open door
    in a confident style and rash;
   he heard at his side the rifles roar,
    and he heard the bullets crash.
   but he laughed as he lifted his pistol-hand,
    and he fired at the rifle flash.

   then out of the shadows the troopers aimed
    at his voice and the pistol sound,
   with the rifle flashes the darkness flamed,
    he staggered and spun around,
   and they riddled his body with rifle balls
    as it lay on the blood-soaked ground.

   there's never a stone at the sleeper's head,
    there's never a fence beside,
   and the wandering stock on the grave may tread
    unnoticed and undenied,
   but the smallest child on the watershed
    can tell you how gilbert died.




the flying gang



   i served my time, in the days gone by,
    in the railway's clash and clang,
   and i worked my way to the end, and i
    was the head of the 'flying gang'.
   'twas a chosen band that was kept at hand
    in case of an urgent need,
   was it south or north we were started forth,
    and away at our utmost speed.
     if word reached town that a bridge was down,
      the imperious summons rang --
     'come out with the pilot engine sharp,
      and away with the flying gang.'

   then a piercing scream and a rush of steam
    as the engine moved ahead,
   with a measured beat by the slum and street
    of the busy town we fled,
   by the uplands bright and the homesteads white,
    with the rush of the western gale,
   and the pilot swayed with the pace we made
    as she rocked on the ringing rail.
     and the country children clapped their hands
      as the engine's echoes rang,
     but their elders said:  'there is work ahead
      when they send for the flying gang.'

   then across the miles of the saltbush plain
    that gleamed with the morning dew,
   where the grasses waved like the ripening grain
    the pilot engine flew,
   a fiery rush in the open bush
    where the grade marks seemed to fly,
   and the order sped on the wires ahead,
    the pilot _must_ go by.
     the governor's special must stand aside,
      and the fast express go hang,
     let your orders be that the line is free
      for the boys of the flying gang.




shearing at castlereagh



   the bell is set a-ringing, and the engine gives a toot,
   there's five and thirty shearers here are shearing for the loot,
   so stir yourselves, you penners-up, and shove the sheep along,
   the musterers are fetching them a hundred thousand strong,
   and make your collie dogs speak up -- what would the buyers say
   in london if the wool was late this year from castlereagh?

   the man that 'rung' the tubbo shed is not the ringer here,
   that stripling from the cooma side can teach him how to shear.
   they trim away the ragged locks, and rip the cutter goes,
   and leaves a track of snowy fleece from brisket to the nose;
   it's lovely how they peel it off with never stop nor stay,
   they're racing for the ringer's place this year at castlereagh.

   the man that keeps the cutters sharp is growling in his cage,
   he's always in a hurry and he's always in a rage --
   'you clumsy-fisted mutton-heads, you'd turn a fellow sick,
   you pass yourselves as shearers, you were born to swing a pick.
   another broken cutter here, that's two you've broke to-day,
   it's awful how such crawlers come to shear at castlereagh.'

   the youngsters picking up the fleece enjoy the merry din,
   they throw the classer up the fleece, he throws it to the bin;
   the pressers standing by the rack are waiting for the wool,
   there's room for just a couple more, the press is nearly full;
   now jump upon the lever, lads, and heave and heave away,
   another bale of golden fleece is branded 'castlereagh'.




the wind's message



   there came a whisper down the bland between the dawn and dark,
   above the tossing of the pines, above the river's flow;
   it stirred the boughs of giant gums and stalwart ironbark;
   it drifted where the wild ducks played amid the swamps below;
   it brought a breath of mountain air from off the hills of pine,
   a scent of eucalyptus trees in honey-laden bloom;
   and drifting, drifting far away along the southern line
   it caught from leaf and grass and fern a subtle strange perfume.

   it reached the toiling city folk, but few there were that heard --
   the rattle of their busy life had choked the whisper down;
   and some but caught a fresh-blown breeze with scent of pine that stirred
   a thought of blue hills far away beyond the smoky town;
   and others heard the whisper pass, but could not understand
   the magic of the breeze's breath that set their hearts aglow,
   nor how the roving wind could bring across the overland
   a sound of voices silent now and songs of long ago.

   but some that heard the whisper clear were filled with vague unrest;
   the breeze had brought its message home, they could not fixed abide;
   their fancies wandered all the day towards the blue hills' breast,
   towards the sunny slopes that lie along the riverside,
   the mighty rolling western plains are very fair to see,
   where waving to the passing breeze the silver myalls stand,
   but fairer are the giant hills, all rugged though they be,
   from which the two great rivers rise that run along the bland.

   oh! rocky range and rugged spur and river running clear,
   that swings around the sudden bends with swirl of snow-white foam,
   though we, your sons, are far away, we sometimes seem to hear
   the message that the breezes bring to call the wanderers home.
   the mountain peaks are white with snow that feeds a thousand rills,
   along the river banks the maize grows tall on virgin land,
   and we shall live to see once more those sunny southern hills,
   and strike once more the bridle track that leads along the bland.




johnson's antidote



   down along the snakebite river, where the overlanders camp,
   where the serpents are in millions, all of the most deadly stamp;
   where the station-cook in terror, nearly every time he bakes,
   mixes up among the doughboys half-a-dozen poison-snakes:
   where the wily free-selector walks in armour-plated pants,
   and defies the stings of scorpions, and the bites of bull-dog ants:
   where the adder and the viper tear each other by the throat,
   there it was that william johnson sought his snake-bite antidote.

   johnson was a free-selector, and his brain went rather queer,
   for the constant sight of serpents filled him with a deadly fear;
   so he tramped his free-selection, morning, afternoon, and night,
   seeking for some great specific that would cure the serpent's bite.
   till king billy, of the mooki, chieftain of the flour-bag head,
   told him, 'spos'n snake bite pfeller, pfeller mostly drop down dead;
   spos'n snake bite old goanna, then you watch a while you see,
   old goanna cure himself with eating little pfeller tree.'
   'that's the cure,' said william johnson, 'point me out this plant sublime,'
   but king billy, feeling lazy, said he'd go another time.
   thus it came to pass that johnson, having got the tale by rote,
   followed every stray goanna, seeking for the antidote.

       .   .   .   .   .

   loafing once beside the river, while he thought his heart would break,
   there he saw a big goanna fighting with a tiger-snake,
   in and out they rolled and wriggled, bit each other, heart and soul,
   till the valiant old goanna swallowed his opponent whole.
   breathless, johnson sat and watched him, saw him struggle up the bank,
   saw him nibbling at the branches of some bushes, green and rank;
   saw him, happy and contented, lick his lips, as off he crept,
   while the bulging in his stomach showed where his opponent slept.
   then a cheer of exultation burst aloud from johnson's throat;
   'luck at last,' said he, 'i've struck it! 'tis the famous antidote.'

   'here it is, the grand elixir, greatest blessing ever known,
   twenty thousand men in india die each year of snakes alone.
   think of all the foreign nations, negro, chow, and blackamoor,
   saved from sudden expiration, by my wondrous snakebite cure.
   it will bring me fame and fortune!  in the happy days to be,
   men of every clime and nation will be round to gaze on me --
   scientific men in thousands, men of mark and men of note,
   rushing down the mooki river, after johnson's antidote.
   it will cure delirium tremens, when the patient's eyeballs stare
   at imaginary spiders, snakes which really are not there.
   when he thinks he sees them wriggle, when he thinks he sees them bloat,
   it will cure him just to think of johnson's snakebite antidote.'

   then he rushed to the museum, found a scientific man --
   'trot me out a deadly serpent, just the deadliest you can;
   i intend to let him bite me, all the risk i will endure,
   just to prove the sterling value of my wondrous snakebite cure.
   even though an adder bit me, back to life again i'd float;
   snakes are out of date, i tell you, since i've found the antidote.'

   said the scientific person, 'if you really want to die,
   go ahead -- but, if you're doubtful, let your sheep-dog have a try.
   get a pair of dogs and try it, let the snake give both a nip;
   give your dog the snakebite mixture, let the other fellow rip;
   if he dies and yours survives him, then it proves the thing is good.
   will you fetch your dog and try it?'  johnson rather thought he would.
   so he went and fetched his canine, hauled him forward by the throat.
   'stump, old man,' says he, 'we'll show them we've the genwine antidote.'

   both the dogs were duly loaded with the poison-gland's contents;
   johnson gave his dog the mixture, then sat down to wait events.
   'mark,' he said, 'in twenty minutes stump'll be a-rushing round,
   while the other wretched creature lies a corpse upon the ground.'
   but, alas for william johnson! ere they'd watched a half-hour's spell
   stumpy was as dead as mutton, t'other dog was live and well.
   and the scientific person hurried off with utmost speed,
   tested johnson's drug and found it was a deadly poison-weed;
   half a tumbler killed an emu, half a spoonful killed a goat,
   all the snakes on earth were harmless to that awful antidote.

       .   .   .   .   .

   down along the mooki river, on the overlanders' camp,
   where the serpents are in millions, all of the most deadly stamp,
   wanders, daily, william johnson, down among those poisonous hordes,
   shooting every stray goanna, calls them 'black and yaller frauds'.
   and king billy, of the mooki, cadging for the cast-off coat,
   somehow seems to dodge the subject of the snake-bite antidote.




ambition and art



        ambition


   i am the maid of the lustrous eyes
    of great fruition,
   whom the sons of men that are over-wise
    have called ambition.

   and the world's success is the only goal
    i have within me;
   the meanest man with the smallest soul
    may woo and win me.

   for the lust of power and the pride of place
    to all i proffer.
   wilt thou take thy part in the crowded race
    for what i offer?

   the choice is thine, and the world is wide --
    thy path is lonely.
   i may not lead and i may not guide --
    i urge thee only.

   i am just a whip and a spur that smites
    to fierce endeavour.
   in the restless days and the sleepless nights
    i urge thee ever.

   thou shalt wake from sleep with a startled cry,
    in fright upleaping
   at a rival's step as it passes by
    whilst thou art sleeping.

   honour and truth shall be overthrown
    in fierce desire;
   thou shalt use thy friend as a stepping-stone
    to mount thee higher.

   when the curtain falls on the sordid strife
    that seemed so splendid,
   thou shalt look with pain on the wasted life
    that thou hast ended.

   thou hast sold thy life for a guerdon small
    in fitful flashes;
   there has been reward -- but the end of all
    is dust and ashes.

   for the night has come and it brings to naught
    thy projects cherished,
   and thine epitaph shall in brass be wrought --
    'he lived and perished.'


        art


   i wait for thee at the outer gate,
    my love, mine only;
   wherefore tarriest thou so late
    while i am lonely.

   thou shalt seek my side with a footstep swift,
    in thee implanted
   is the love of art and the greatest gift
    that god has granted.

   and the world's concerns with its rights and wrongs
    shall seem but small things --
   poet or painter, a singer of songs,
    thine art is all things.

   for the wine of life is a woman's love
    to keep beside thee;
   but the love of art is a thing above --
    a star to guide thee.

   as the years go by with thy love of art
    all undiminished,
   thou shalt end thy days with a quiet heart --
    thy work is finished.

   so the painter fashions a picture strong
    that fadeth never,
   and the singer singeth a wond'rous song
    that lives for ever.




the daylight is dying



   the daylight is dying
    away in the west,
   the wild birds are flying
    in silence to rest;
   in leafage and frondage
    where shadows are deep,
   they pass to its bondage --
    the kingdom of sleep.
   and watched in their sleeping
    by stars in the height,
   they rest in your keeping,
    oh, wonderful night.

   when night doth her glories
    of starshine unfold,
   'tis then that the stories
    of bush-land are told.
   unnumbered i hold them
    in memories bright,
   but who could unfold them,
    or read them aright?
   beyond all denials
    the stars in their glories
   the breeze in the myalls
    are part of these stories.
   the waving of grasses,
    the song of the river
   that sings as it passes
    for ever and ever,
   the hobble-chains' rattle,
    the calling of birds,
   the lowing of cattle
    must blend with the words.
   without these, indeed, you
    would find it ere long,
   as though i should read you
    the words of a song
   that lamely would linger
    when lacking the rune,
   the voice of the singer,
    the lilt of the tune.

   but, as one half-hearing
    an old-time refrain,
   with memory clearing,
    recalls it again,
   these tales, roughly wrought of
    the bush and its ways,
   may call back a thought of
    the wandering days,
   and, blending with each
    in the mem'ries that throng,
   there haply shall reach
    you some echo of song.




in defence of the bush



   so you're back from up the country, mister townsman, where you went,
   and you're cursing all the business in a bitter discontent;
   well, we grieve to disappoint you, and it makes us sad to hear
   that it wasn't cool and shady -- and there wasn't plenty beer,
   and the loony bullock snorted when you first came into view;
   well, you know it's not so often that he sees a swell like you;
   and the roads were hot and dusty, and the plains were burnt and brown,
   and no doubt you're better suited drinking lemon-squash in town.
   yet, perchance, if you should journey down the very track you went
   in a month or two at furthest you would wonder what it meant,
   where the sunbaked earth was gasping like a creature in its pain
   you would find the grasses waving like a field of summer grain,
   and the miles of thirsty gutters blocked with sand and choked with mud,
   you would find them mighty rivers with a turbid, sweeping flood;
   for the rain and drought and sunshine make no changes in the street,
   in the sullen line of buildings and the ceaseless tramp of feet;
   but the bush hath moods and changes, as the seasons rise and fall,
   and the men who know the bush-land -- they are loyal through it all.

       .   .   .   .   .

   but you found the bush was dismal and a land of no delight,
   did you chance to hear a chorus in the shearers' huts at night?
   did they 'rise up, william riley' by the camp-fire's cheery blaze?
   did they rise him as we rose him in the good old droving days?
   and the women of the homesteads and the men you chanced to meet --
   were their faces sour and saddened like the 'faces in the street',
   and the 'shy selector children' -- were they better now or worse
   than the little city urchins who would greet you with a curse?
   is not such a life much better than the squalid street and square
   where the fallen women flaunt it in the fierce electric glare,
   where the sempstress plies her sewing till her eyes are sore and red
   in a filthy, dirty attic toiling on for daily bread?
   did you hear no sweeter voices in the music of the bush
   than the roar of trams and 'buses, and the war-whoop of 'the push'?
   did the magpies rouse your slumbers with their carol sweet and strange?
   did you hear the silver chiming of the bell-birds on the range?
   but, perchance, the wild birds' music by your senses was despised,
   for you say you'll stay in townships till the bush is civilised.
   would you make it a tea-garden and on sundays have a band
   where the 'blokes' might take their 'donahs',
     with a 'public' close at hand?
   you had better stick to sydney and make merry with the 'push',
   for the bush will never suit you, and you'll never suit the bush.




last week



   oh, the new-chum went to the back block run,
   but he should have gone there last week.
   he tramped ten miles with a loaded gun,
   but of turkey or duck he saw never a one,
   for he should have been there last week,
    they said,
   there were flocks of 'em there last week.

   he wended his way to a waterfall,
   and he should have gone there last week.
   he carried a camera, legs and all,
   but the day was hot, and the stream was small,
   for he should have gone there last week,
    they said.
   they drowned a man there last week.

   he went for a drive, and he made a start,
   which should have been made last week,
   for the old horse died of a broken heart;
   so he footed it home and he dragged the cart --
   but the horse was all right last week,
    they said.
   he trotted a match last week.

   so he asked the bushies who came from far
   to visit the town last week,
   if they'd dine with him, and they said 'hurrah!'
   but there wasn't a drop in the whisky jar --
   you should have been here last week,
    he said,
   i drank it all up last week!




those names



   the shearers sat in the firelight, hearty and hale and strong,
   after the hard day's shearing, passing the joke along:
   the 'ringer' that shore a hundred, as they never were shorn before,
   and the novice who, toiling bravely, had tommy-hawked half a score,
   the tarboy, the cook, and the slushy, the sweeper that swept the board,
   the picker-up, and the penner, with the rest of the shearing horde.
   there were men from the inland stations
     where the skies like a furnace glow,
   and men from the snowy river, the land of the frozen snow;
   there were swarthy queensland drovers who reckoned all land by miles,
   and farmers' sons from the murray, where many a vineyard smiles.
   they started at telling stories when they wearied of cards and games,
   and to give these stories a flavour they threw in some local names,
   and a man from the bleak monaro, away on the tableland,
   he fixed his eyes on the ceiling, and he started to play his hand.

   he told them of adjintoothbong, where the pine-clad mountains freeze,
   and the weight of the snow in summer breaks branches off the trees,
   and, as he warmed to the business, he let them have it strong --
   nimitybelle, conargo, wheeo, bongongolong;
   he lingered over them fondly, because they recalled to mind
   a thought of the old bush homestead, and the girl that he left behind.
   then the shearers all sat silent till a man in the corner rose;
   said he, 'i've travelled a-plenty but never heard names like those.
   out in the western districts, out on the castlereagh
   most of the names are easy -- short for a man to say.

   'you've heard of mungrybambone and the gundabluey pine,
   quobbotha, girilambone, and terramungamine,
   quambone, eunonyhareenyha, wee waa, and buntijo --'
   but the rest of the shearers stopped him:
     'for the sake of your jaw, go slow,
   if you reckon those names are short ones out where such names prevail,
   just try and remember some long ones before you begin the tale.'
   and the man from the western district, though never a word he said,
   just winked with his dexter eyelid, and then he retired to bed.




a bush christening



   on the outer barcoo where the churches are few,
    and men of religion are scanty,
   on a road never cross'd 'cept by folk that are lost,
    one michael magee had a shanty.

   now this mike was the dad of a ten year old lad,
    plump, healthy, and stoutly conditioned;
   he was strong as the best, but poor mike had no rest
    for the youngster had never been christened.

   and his wife used to cry, 'if the darlin' should die
    saint peter would not recognise him.'
   but by luck he survived till a preacher arrived,
    who agreed straightaway to baptise him.

   now the artful young rogue, while they held their collogue,
    with his ear to the keyhole was listenin',
   and he muttered in fright, while his features turned white,
    'what the divil and all is this christenin'?'

   he was none of your dolts, he had seen them brand colts,
    and it seemed to his small understanding,
   if the man in the frock made him one of the flock,
    it must mean something very like branding.

   so away with a rush he set off for the bush,
    while the tears in his eyelids they glistened --
   ''tis outrageous,' says he, 'to brand youngsters like me,
    i'll be dashed if i'll stop to be christened!'

   like a young native dog he ran into a log,
    and his father with language uncivil,
   never heeding the 'praste' cried aloud in his haste,
    'come out and be christened, you divil!'

   but he lay there as snug as a bug in a rug,
    and his parents in vain might reprove him,
   till his reverence spoke (he was fond of a joke)
    'i've a notion,' says he, 'that'll move him.'

   'poke a stick up the log, give the spalpeen a prog;
    poke him aisy -- don't hurt him or maim him,
   'tis not long that he'll stand, i've the water at hand,
    as he rushes out this end i'll name him.

   'here he comes, and for shame! ye've forgotten the name --
    is it patsy or michael or dinnis?'
   here the youngster ran out, and the priest gave a shout --
    'take your chance, anyhow, wid 'maginnis'!'

   as the howling young cub ran away to the scrub
    where he knew that pursuit would be risky,
   the priest, as he fled, flung a flask at his head
    that was labelled '_maginnis's whisky_'!

   and maginnis magee has been made a j.p.,
    and the one thing he hates more than sin is
   to be asked by the folk, who have heard of the joke,
    how he came to be christened 'maginnis'!




how the favourite beat us



   'aye,' said the boozer, 'i tell you it's true, sir,
   i once was a punter with plenty of pelf,
   but gone is my glory, i'll tell you the story
   how i stiffened my horse and got stiffened myself.

   ''twas a mare called the cracker, i came down to back her,
   but found she was favourite all of a rush,
   the folk just did pour on to lay six to four on,
   and several bookies were killed in the crush.

   'it seems old tomato was stiff, though a starter;
   they reckoned him fit for the caulfield to keep.
   the bloke and the donah were scratched by their owner,
   he only was offered three-fourths of the sweep.

   'we knew salamander was slow as a gander,
   the mare could have beat him the length of the straight,
   and old manumission was out of condition,
   and most of the others were running off weight.

   'no doubt someone 'blew it', for everyone knew it,
   the bets were all gone, and i muttered in spite
   'if i can't get a copper, by jingo, i'll stop her,
   let the public fall in, it will serve the brutes right.'

   'i said to the jockey, 'now, listen, my cocky,
   you watch as you're cantering down by the stand,
   i'll wait where that toff is and give you the office,
   you're only to win if i lift up my hand.'

   'i then tried to back her -- 'what price is the cracker?'
   'our books are all full, sir,' each bookie did swear;
   my mind, then, i made up, my fortune i played up
   i bet every shilling against my own mare.

   'i strolled to the gateway, the mare in the straightway
   was shifting and dancing, and pawing the ground,
   the boy saw me enter and wheeled for his canter,
   when a darned great mosquito came buzzing around.

   'they breed 'em at hexham, it's risky to vex 'em,
   they suck a man dry at a sitting, no doubt,
   but just as the mare passed, he fluttered my hair past,
   i lifted my hand, and i flattened him out.

   'i was stunned when they started, the mare simply darted
   away to the front when the flag was let fall,
   for none there could match her, and none tried to catch her --
   she finished a furlong in front of them all.

   'you bet that i went for the boy, whom i sent for
   the moment he weighed and came out of the stand --
   'who paid you to win it?  come, own up this minute.'
   'lord love yer,' said he, 'why you lifted your hand.'

   ''twas true, by st. peter, that cursed 'muskeeter'
   had broke me so broke that i hadn't a brown,
   and you'll find the best course is when dealing with horses
   to win when you're able, and _keep your hands down_.




the great calamity



   macfierce'un came to whiskeyhurst
    when summer days were hot,
   and bided there wi' jock mcthirst,
    a brawny brother scot.
   gude faith!  they made the whisky fly,
    like highland chieftains true,
   and when they'd drunk the beaker dry
    they sang 'we are nae fou!'

       'there is nae folk like oor ain folk,
        sae gallant and sae true.'
       they sang the only scottish joke
        which is, 'we are nae fou.'

   said bold mcthirst, 'let saxons jaw
    aboot their great concerns,
   but bonny scotland beats them a',
    the land o' cakes and burns,
   the land o' partridge, deer, and grouse,
    fill up your glass, i beg,
   there's muckle whusky i' the house,
    forbye what's in the keg.'

       and here a hearty laugh he laughed,
        'just come wi' me, i beg.'
       macfierce'un saw with pleasure daft
        a fifty-gallon keg.

   'losh, man, that's grand,' macfierce'un cried,
    'saw ever man the like,
   now, wi' the daylight, i maun ride
    to meet a southron tyke,
   but i'll be back ere summer's gone,
    so bide for me, i beg,
   we'll make a grand assault upon
    yon deevil of a keg.'

       .   .   .   .   .

   macfierce'un rode to whiskeyhurst,
    when summer days were gone,
   and there he met with jock mcthirst
    was greetin' all alone.
   'mcthirst what gars ye look sae blank?
    have all yer wits gane daft?
   has that accursed southron bank
    called up your overdraft?
   is all your grass burnt up wi' drouth?
    is wool and hides gone flat?'
   mcthirst replied, 'gude friend, in truth,
    'tis muckle waur than that.'

   'has sair misfortune cursed your life
    that you should weep sae free?
   is harm upon your bonny wife,
    the children at your knee?
   is scaith upon your house and hame?'
    mcthirst upraised his head:
   'my bairns hae done the deed of shame --
    'twere better they were dead.

   'to think my bonny infant son
    should do the deed o' guilt --
   _he let the whuskey spigot run,
    and a' the whuskey's spilt!_'

       .   .   .   .   .

   upon them both these words did bring
    a solemn silence deep,
   gude faith, it is a fearsome thing
    to see two strong men weep.




come-by-chance



   as i pondered very weary o'er a volume long and dreary --
   for the plot was void of interest -- 'twas the postal guide, in fact,
   there i learnt the true location, distance, size, and population
   of each township, town, and village in the radius of the act.

   and i learnt that puckawidgee stands beside the murrumbidgee,
   and that booleroi and bumble get their letters twice a year,
   also that the post inspector, when he visited collector,
   closed the office up instanter, and re-opened dungalear.

   but my languid mood forsook me, when i found a name that took me,
   quite by chance i came across it -- 'come-by-chance' was what i read;
   no location was assigned it, not a thing to help one find it,
   just an n which stood for northward, and the rest was all unsaid.

   i shall leave my home, and forthward wander stoutly to the northward
   till i come by chance across it, and i'll straightway settle down,
   for there can't be any hurry, nor the slightest cause for worry
   where the telegraph don't reach you nor the railways run to town.

   and one's letters and exchanges come by chance across the ranges,
   where a wiry young australian leads a pack-horse once a week,
   and the good news grows by keeping, and you're spared the pain of weeping
   over bad news when the mailman drops the letters in the creek.

   but i fear, and more's the pity, that there's really no such city,
   for there's not a man can find it of the shrewdest folk i know,
   'come-by-chance', be sure it never means a land of fierce endeavour,
   it is just the careless country where the dreamers only go.

       .   .   .   .   .

   though we work and toil and hustle in our life of haste and bustle,
   all that makes our life worth living comes unstriven for and free;
   man may weary and importune, but the fickle goddess fortune
   deals him out his pain or pleasure, careless what his worth may be.

   all the happy times entrancing, days of sport and nights of dancing,
   moonlit rides and stolen kisses, pouting lips and loving glance:
   when you think of these be certain you have looked behind the curtain,
   you have had the luck to linger just a while in 'come-by-chance'.




under the shadow of kiley's hill



   this is the place where they all were bred;
    some of the rafters are standing still;
   now they are scattered and lost and dead,
   every one from the old nest fled,
    out of the shadow of kiley's hill.

   better it is that they ne'er came back --
    changes and chances are quickly rung;
   now the old homestead is gone to rack,
   green is the grass on the well-worn track
    down by the gate where the roses clung.

   gone is the garden they kept with care;
    left to decay at its own sweet will,
   fruit trees and flower beds eaten bare,
   cattle and sheep where the roses were,
    under the shadow of kiley's hill.

   where are the children that throve and grew
    in the old homestead in days gone by?
   one is away on the far barcoo
   watching his cattle the long year through,
    watching them starve in the droughts and die.

   one in the town where all cares are rife,
    weary with troubles that cramp and kill,
   fain would be done with the restless strife,
   fain would go back to the old bush life,
    back to the shadow of kiley's hill.

   one is away on the roving quest,
    seeking his share of the golden spoil,
   out in the wastes of the trackless west,
   wandering ever he gives the best
    of his years and strength to the hopeless toil.

   what of the parents?  that unkept mound
    shows where they slumber united still;
   rough is their grave, but they sleep as sound
   out on the range as on holy ground,
    under the shadow of kiley's hill.




jim carew



   born of a thoroughbred english race,
    well proportioned and closely knit,
   neat of figure and handsome face,
    always ready and always fit,
   hard and wiry of limb and thew,
   that was the ne'er-do-well jim carew.

   one of the sons of the good old land --
    many a year since his like was known;
   never a game but he took command,
    never a sport but he held his own;
   gained at his college a triple blue --
   good as they make them was jim carew.

   came to grief -- was it card or horse?
    nobody asked and nobody cared;
   ship him away to the bush of course,
    ne'er-do-well fellows are easily spared;
   only of women a tolerable few
   sorrowed at parting with jim carew.

   gentleman jim on the cattle camp,
    sitting his horse with an easy grace;
   but the reckless living has left its stamp
    in the deep drawn lines of that handsome face,
   and a harder look in those eyes of blue:
   prompt at a quarrel is jim carew.

   billy the lasher was out for gore --
    twelve-stone navvy with chest of hair,
   when he opened out with a hungry roar
    on a ten-stone man it was hardly fair;
   but his wife was wise if his face she knew
   by the time you were done with him, jim carew.

   gentleman jim in the stockmen's hut
    works with them, toils with them, side by side;
   as to his past -- well, his lips are shut.
    'gentleman once,' say his mates with pride;
   and the wildest cornstalk can ne'er outdo
   in feats of recklessness, jim carew.

   what should he live for?  a dull despair!
    drink is his master and drags him down,
   water of lethe that drowns all care.
    gentleman jim has a lot to drown,
   and he reigns as king with a drunken crew,
   sinking to misery, jim carew.

   such is the end of the ne'er-do-well --
    jimmy the boozer, all down at heel;
   but he straightens up when he's asked to tell
    his name and race, and a flash of steel
   still lightens up in those eyes of blue --
   'i am, or -- no, i _was_ -- jim carew.'




the swagman's rest



   we buried old bob where the bloodwoods wave
    at the foot of the eaglehawk;
   we fashioned a cross on the old man's grave,
    for fear that his ghost might walk;
   we carved his name on a bloodwood tree,
    with the date of his sad decease,
   and in place of 'died from effects of spree',
    we wrote 'may he rest in peace'.

   for bob was known on the overland,
    a regular old bush wag,
   tramping along in the dust and sand,
    humping his well-worn swag.
   he would camp for days in the river-bed,
    and loiter and 'fish for whales'.
   'i'm into the swagman's yard,' he said,
    'and i never shall find the rails.'

   but he found the rails on that summer night
    for a better place -- or worse,
   as we watched by turns in the flickering light
    with an old black gin for nurse.
   the breeze came in with the scent of pine,
    the river sounded clear,
   when a change came on, and we saw the sign
    that told us the end was near.

   but he spoke in a cultured voice and low --
    'i fancy they've sent the route;
   i once was an army man, you know,
    though now i'm a drunken brute;
   but bury me out where the bloodwoods wave,
    and if ever you're fairly stuck,
   just take and shovel me out of the grave
    and, maybe, i'll bring you luck.

   'for i've always heard --' here his voice fell weak,
    his strength was well-nigh sped,
   he gasped and struggled and tried to speak,
    then fell in a moment -- dead.
   thus ended a wasted life and hard,
    of energies misapplied --
   old bob was out of the 'swagman's yard'
    and over the great divide.

       .   .   .   .   .

   the drought came down on the field and flock,
    and never a raindrop fell,
   though the tortured moans of the starving stock
    might soften a fiend from hell.
   and we thought of the hint that the swagman gave
    when he went to the great unseen --
   we shovelled the skeleton out of the grave
    to see what his hint might mean.

   we dug where the cross and the grave posts were,
    we shovelled away the mould,
   when sudden a vein of quartz lay bare
    all gleaming with yellow gold.
   'twas a reef with never a fault nor baulk
    that ran from the range's crest,
   and the richest mine on the eaglehawk
    is known as 'the swagman's rest'.


   [the end.]





[from the section of advertisements at the end of the 1911 printing.]


the man from snowy river, and other verses.

     by a. b. paterson.

the literary year book:  the immediate success of this
book of bush ballads is without parallel in colonial literary annals,
nor can any living english or american poet boast so wide a public,
always excepting mr. rudyard kipling.

spectator:  these lines have the true lyrical cry in them.
eloquent and ardent verses.

athenaeum:  swinging, rattling ballads of ready humour, ready pathos,
and crowding adventure. ...  stirring and entertaining ballads
about great rides, in which the lines gallop like the very hoofs
of the horses.

the times:  at his best he compares not unfavourably with the author
of 'barrack-room ballads'.

mr. a. patchett martin, in literature (london):  in my opinion,
it is the absolutely un-english, thoroughly australian style and character
of these new bush bards which has given them such immediate popularity,
such wide vogue, among all classes of the rising native generation.

westminster gazette:  australia has produced in mr. a. b. paterson
a national poet whose bush ballads are as distinctly characteristic
of the country as burns's poetry is characteristic of scotland.

the scotsman:  a book like this... is worth a dozen of the aspiring,
idealistic sort, since it has a deal of rough laughter
and a dash of real tears in its composition.

glasgow herald:  these ballads... are full of such go
that the mere reading of them make the blood tingle....
but there are other things in mr. paterson's book besides
mere racing and chasing, and each piece bears the mark
of special local knowledge, feeling, and colour.
the poet has also a note of pathos, which is always wholesome.

literary world:  he gallops along with a by no means doubtful music,
shouting his vigorous songs as he rides in pursuit of wild bush horses,
constraining us to listen and applaud by dint of his manly tones
and capital subjects...  we turn to mr. paterson's roaring muse
with instantaneous gratitude.





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the man from snowy river, by
andrew barton 'banjo' paterson

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the man from snowy river ***

***** this file should be named 213-0.txt or 213-0.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/213/

produced by a. light, and sheridan ash

updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project
gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b.  project gutenberg is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (the foundation
 or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.

1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.

1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase project
gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase project gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original plain vanilla ascii or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4, information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
     license.  you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg-tm works.

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.


section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

for additional contact information:
     dr. gregory b. newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
