the project gutenberg ebook of the circus boys on the flying rings, by edgar b. p. darlington

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

title: the circus boys on the flying rings

author: edgar b. p. darlington

release date: january, 2001 [ebook #2474]
[most recently updated: october 29, 2020]

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

produced by: greg berckes

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the circus boys on the flying rings ***

[illustration]




the circus boys on the flying rings

or
making the start in the sawdust life

by edgar b. p. darlington


contents

 i the lure of the circus
 ii phil hears his dismissal
 iii making his start in the world
 iv the circus comes to town
 v when the bands played
 vi proving his mettle
 vii making friends with the elephants
 viii in the sawdust arena
 ix getting his first call
 x phil gets a surprise
 xi the first night with the show
 xii a thrilling rescue
 xiii the dawning of a new day
 xiv an unexpected hit
 xv a stroke of good fortune
 xvi his first setback
 xvii left behind
 xviii a startling discovery
 xix teddy distinguishes himself
 xx the return to the sawdust life
 xxi an elephant in jail
 xxii emperor answers the signal
 xxiii the mystery solved
 xxiv conclusion




chapter i.
the lure of the circus


i say, phil, i can do that.

do what, teddy?

a cartwheel in the air like that fellow is doing in the picture on the
billboard there.

oh, pshaw! you only think you can. besides, thats not a cartwheel;
thats a double somersault. its a real stunt, let me tell you. why, i
can do a cartwheel myself. but up in the air like thatwell, i dont
know. i guess not. id be willing to try it, though, if i had something
below to catch me, added the lad, critically surveying the figures on
the poster before them.

howd you like to be a circus man, phil?

phils dark eyes glowed with a new light, his slender figure
straightening until the lad appeared fully half a head taller.

more than anything else in the world, he breathed. would you?

going to be, nodded teddy decisively, as if the matter were already
settled.

oh, you are, eh?

uh-huh!

when?

i dont know. somedaysomeday when i get old enough, maybe.

phil forrest surveyed his companion with a half critical smile on his
face.

what are you going to dobe a trapeze performer or what?

well, reflected the lad wisely, maybe i shall be an or what. im
not sure. sometimes i think i should like to be the fellow who cracks
the whip with the long lash and makes the clowns hop around on one
foot

you mean the ringmaster?

i guess thats the fellow. he makes em all get around lively. then,
sometimes, i think i would rather be a clown. i can skin a cat on the
flying rings to beat the band, now. what would you rather be, phil?

me? oh, something up in the airhigh up near the peak of the
tentsomething thrilling that would make the people sit up on the board
seats and gasp, when, all dressed in pink and spangles, id go flying
through the air

just like a bird? questioned teddy, with a rising inflection in his
voice.

yes. thats what id like most to do, teddy, concluded the lad, his
face flushed with the thought of the triumphs that might be his.

teddy tucker uttered a soft, long-drawn whistle.

my, youve got it bad, havent you? never thought you were that set on
the circus. wouldnt it be fine, now, if we both could get with a
show?

great! agreed phil, with an emphatic nod. sometimes i think my uncle
would be glad to have me go awaythat he wouldnt care whether i joined
a circus, or what became of me.

aint had much fun since your ma died, have you, phil? questioned
teddy sympathetically.

not much, answered the lad, a thin, gray mist clouding his eyes. no,
not much. but, then, im not complaining.

your uncles a mean old

there, there, teddy, please dont say it. he may be all you think he
is, but for all the mean things hes said and done to me, ive never
given him an impudent word, teddy. can you guess why?

cause hes your uncle, maybe, grumbled teddy.

no, cause hes my mothers brotherthats why.

i dont know. maybe id feel that way if id had a mother.

but you did.

nobody ever introduced us, if i did. guess she didnt know me. but if
your uncle was my uncle do you know what id do with him, phil
forrest?

dont lets talk about him. lets talk about the circus. its more
fun, interrupted phil, turning to the billboard again and gazing at it
with great interest.

they were standing before the glowing posters of the great sparling
combined shows, that was to visit edmeston on the following thursday.

phillip forrest and teddy tucker were fast friends, though they were as
different in appearance and temperament as two boys well could be. phil
was just past sixteen, while teddy was a little less than a year
younger. phils figure was slight and graceful, while that of his
companion was short and chubby.

both lads were orphans. phils parents had been dead for something more
than five years. since their death he had been living with a penurious
old uncle who led a hermit-like existence in a shack on the outskirts
of edmeston.

but the lad could remember when it had been otherwisewhen he had lived
in his own home, surrounded by luxury and refinement, until evil days
came upon them without warning. his fathers property had been swept
away, almost in a night. a year later both of his parents had died,
leaving him to face the world alone.

the boys uncle had taken him in begrudgingly, and phils life from
that moment on had been one of self-denial and hard work. yet he was
thankful for one thingthankful that his miserly old uncle had
permitted him to continue at school.

standing high in his class meant something in phils case, for the boy
was obliged to work at whatever he could find to do after school hours,
his uncle compelling him to contribute something to the household
expenses every week. his duties done, phil was obliged to study far
into the night, under the flickering light of a tallow candle, because
oil cost too much. sometimes his candle burned far past the midnight
hour, while he applied himself to his books that he might be prepared
for the next days classes.

hard lines for a boy?

yes. but phil forrest was not the lad to complain. he went about his
studies the same as he approached any other task that was set for him
to dowent about it with a grim, silent determination to conquer it.
and he always did.

as for teddychristened theodore, but so long ago that he had forgotten
that that was his namehe studied, not because he possessed a burning
desire for knowledge, but as a matter of course, and much in the same
spirit he did the chores for the people with whom he lived.

teddy was quite young when his parents died leaving him without a
relative in the world. a poor, but kind-hearted family in edmeston had
taken the lad in rather than see him become a public charge. with them
he had lived and been cared for ever since. of late years, however, he
had been able to do considerable toward lightening the burden for them
by the money he managed to earn here and there.

the two boys were on their way home from school. there remained but one
more day before the close of the term, which was a matter of sincere
regret to phil and of keen satisfaction to his companion. just now both
were too full of the subject of the coming show to think of much else.

going to the show, phil?

i am afraid not.

why not?

i havent any money; thats the principal reason, smiled the boy.
are you?

sure. dont need any money to go to a circus.

you dont?

no.

how do you manage it?

crawl in under the tent when the man aint looking, answered teddy
promptly.

i wouldnt want to do that, decided the older lad, with a shake of
the head. it wouldnt be quite honest. do you think so?

teddy tucker shrugged his shoulders indifferently.

never thought about it. dont let myself think about it. isnt safe,
for i might not go to the show if i did. whats your other reason?

for not going to the circus?

yes.

well, i dont think uncle would let me; thats a fact.

why not?

says circuses and all that sort of thing are evil influences.

oh, pshaw! wish he was my uncle, decided teddy belligerently. how
long are you going to stand for being mauled around like a little
yellow dog?

ill stand most anything for the sake of getting an education. when i
get that then im going to strike out for myself, and do something in
the world. youll hear from me yet, teddy tucker, and maybe ill hear
from you, too.

see me, you meansee me doing stunts on a high something-or- other in
a circus. watch me turn a somersault.

the lad stood poised on the edge of the ditch, on the other side of
which the billboard stood. this gave him the advantage of an elevated
position from which to attempt his feat.

look out that you dont break your neck, warned phil. id try it on
a haymow, or something like that, first.

dont you worry about me. see how easy that fellow in the picture is
doing it. here goes!

teddy launched himself into the air, with a very good imitation of a
diver making a plunge into the water, hands stretched out before him,
legs straight behind him.

he was headed straight for the ditch.

turn, teddy! turn! youll strike on your head.

teddy was as powerless to turn as if he had been paralyzed from head to
foot. down he went, straight as an arrow. there followed a splash as
his head struck the water of the ditch, the lads feet beating a tattoo
in the air while his head was stuck fast in the mud at the bottom of
the ditch.

hell drown, gasped phil, springing down into the little stream,
regardless of the damage liable to be done to his own clothes.

throwing both arms about the body of his companion he gave a mighty
tug. teddy stuck obstinately, and phil was obliged to take a fresh hold
before he succeeded in hauling the lad from his perilous position.
teddy was gasping for breath. his face, plastered with mud, was
unrecognizable, while his clothes were covered from head to foot.

phil dumped him on the grass beneath the circus billboard and began
wiping the mud from his companions face, while teddy quickly sat up,
blinking the mud out of his eyes and grumbling unintelligibly.

youre a fine circus performer, you are, laughed phil. suppose you
had been performing on a flying trapeze in a circus, what do you
suppose would have happened to you?

id have had a net under me then, and i wouldnt have fallen in the
ditch, grunted teddy sullenly.

what do you suppose the folks will say when you go home in that
condition?

dont care what they say. fellow has got to learn sometime, and if i
dont have any worse thing happen to me than falling in a ditch i ought
to be pretty well satisfied. guess ill go back now. come on, go long
with me.

phil turned and strode along by the side of his companion until they
reached the house where teddy lived.

come on in.

im sorry, teddy, but i cant. my uncle will be expecting me, and he
wont like it if i am late.

all right; see you tomorrow if you dont come out again tonight. well
try some more stunts then.

i wouldnt till after the circus, were i in your place, laughed phil.

why not!

cause, if you break your neck, you wont be able to go to the show.

huh! grunted teddy, hastily turning his back on his companion and
starting for the house.

phil took his way home silently and thoughtfully, carrying his precious
bundle of books under an arm, his active mind planning as to how he
might employ his time to the best advantage during the summer vacation
that was now so close at hand.

a rheumatic, bent figure was standing in front of the shack where the
lad lived, glaring up the street from beneath bushy eyebrows, noting
phil forrests leisurely gait disapprovingly.

phil saw him a moment later.

im in for a scolding, he muttered. wonder what it is all about this
time. i dont seem able to do a thing to please uncle abner.




chapter ii.
phil hears his dismissal


where you been, young man? the question was a snarl rather than a
sentence.

to school, uncle, of course.

schools been out more than an hour. i say, where have you been?

i stopped on the way for a few minutes.

you did? exploded abner adams. where?

teddy tucker and i stopped to read a circus bill over there on clover
street. we did not stop but a few minutes. was there any harm in that?

harm? circus bill

and i want to go to the circus, too, uncle, when it comes here. you
know? i have not been to anything of that sort since mother diednot
once. ill work and earn the money. i can go in the evening after my
work is finished. please let me go, uncle.

for a full minute abner adams was too overcome with his emotions to
speak. he hobbled about in a circle, smiting the ground with his cane,
alternately brandishing it threateningly in the air over the head of
the unflinching phil.

circus! he shouted. i might have known it! i might have known it!
you and that tucker boy are two of a kind. youll both come to some bad
ending. only fools and questionable characters go to such places

my mother and father went, and they always took me, replied the boy,
drawing himself up with dignity. you certainly do not include them in
either of the two classes you have named?

so much the worse for them! so much the worse for them. they were a
pair of

uncle, uncle! warned phil. please dont say anything against my
parents. i wont stand it. dont forget that my mother was your own
sister, too.

im not likely to forget it, after shes bundled such a baggage as you
into my care. youre turning out a worthless, good-for- nothing loaf

you havent said whether or not i might go to the circus, uncle,
reminded phil.

circus? no! ill have none of my money spent on any such worthless

but i didnt ask you to spend your money, even though you have plenty
of it. i said i would earn the money

youll have a chance to earn it, and right quick at that. no, you
wont go to any circus so long as youre living under my roof.

very well, uncle, i shall do as you wish, of course, answered phil,
hiding his disappointment as well as he could. the lad shifted his
bundle of books to the other hand and started slowly for the house.

abner adams hobbled about until he faced the lad again, an angry gleam
lighting up his squinting eyes.

come back here!

phil halted, turning.

i said come back here.

the lad did so, his self-possession and quiet dignity never deserting
him for an instant. this angered the crabbed old uncle more than ever.

when will you get through school?

tomorrow, i believe.

huh! then, i suppose you intend to loaf for the rest of the summer and
live on my hard earned savings. is that it?

no, sir; i hadnt thought of doing anything of the sort. i thought

what did you think?

i thought i would find something to do. of course, i do not expect to
be idle. i shall work at something until school begins again next fall,
then, of course, i shall not be able to do so much.

school! youve had enough school! in my days boys didnt spend the
best part of their lives in going to school. they worked.

yes, sir; i am willing to work, too. but, uncle, i must have an
education. i shall be able to earn so much more then, and, if
necessary, i shall be able to pay you for all you have spent on me,
which isnt much, you know.

what, what? you dare to be impudent to me? you

no, sir, i am not impudent. i have never been that and i never shall
be; but you are accusing me wrongfully.

enough. you have done with school

youyou mean that i am not to go to school any morethat i have got to
go through life with the little i have learned? is that what you mean,
uncle? asked the boy, with a sinking heart.

you heard me.

what do you want me to do?

work!

i am working and i shall be working, phil replied.

youre right you will, or youll starve. i have been thinking this
thing over a lot lately. a boy never amounts to anything if hes
mollycoddled and allowed to spend his days depending on someone else.
throw him out and let him fight his own way. thats what my father used
to tell me, and thats what im going to say to you.

what do you mean, uncle?

mean? cant you understand the english language? have i got to draw a
picture to make you understand? get to work!

i am going to as soon as school is out.

youll do it now. get yourself out of my house, bag and baggage!

uncle, uncle! protested the lad in amazement. would you turn me
out?

would i? i have, only you are too stupid to know it. youll thank me
for it when you get old enough to have some sense.

phils heart sank within him, and it required all his self-control to
keep the bitter tears from his eyes.

when do you wish me to go? he asked without a quaver in his voice.

now.

very well, ill go. but what do you think my mother would say, could
she know this?

that will do, young man. do your chores, and then

i am not working for you now, uncle, you know, so i shall have to
refuse to do the chores. there is fifty cents due me from mr. churchill
for fixing his chicken coop. you may get that, i dont want it.

phil turned away once more, and with head erect entered the house,
going straight to his room, leaving abner adams fuming and stamping
about in the front yard. the old mans rage knew no bounds. he was so
beside himself with anger over the fancied impudence of his nephew
that, had the boy been present, he might have so far forgotten himself
as to have used his cane on phil.

but phil by this time had entered his own room, locking the door behind
him. the lad threw his books down on the bed, dropped into a chair and
sat palefaced, tearless and silent. slowly his eyes rose to the
old-fashioned bureau, where his comb and brush lay. the eyes halted
when at length they rested on the picture of his mother.

the lad rose as if drawn by invisible hands, reached out and clasped
the photograph to him. then the pent-up tears welled up in a flood.
with the picture pressed to his burning cheek phil forrest threw
himself on his bed and sobbed out his bitter grief. he did not hear the
thump of abner adams cane on the bedroom door, nor the angry demands
that he open it.

mother, mother! breathed the unhappy boy, as his sobs gradually
merged into long-drawn, trembling sighs.

perhaps his appeal was not unheard. at least phil forrest sprang from
his bed, holding the picture away from him with both hands and gazing
into the eyes of his mother.

slowly his shoulders drew back and his head came up, while an
expression of strong determination flashed into his own eyes.

ill do itill be a man, mother! he exclaimed in a voice in which
there was not the slightest tremor now. ill fight the battle and ill
win.

phil forest had come to the parting of the ways, which he faced with a
courage unusual in one of his years. there was little to be done. he
packed his few belongings in a bag that had been his mothers. the lad
possessed one suit besides the one he wore, and this he stowed away as
best he could, determining to press it out when he had located himself.

finally his task was finished. he stood in the middle of the floor
glancing around the little room that had been his home for so long. but
he felt no regrets. he was only making sure that he had not left
anything behind. having satisfied himself on this point, phil gathered
up his bundle of books, placed the picture of his mother in his inside
coat pocket, then threw open the door.

the lads uncle had stamped to the floor below, where he was awaiting
phils coming.

good-bye, uncle, he said quietly, extending a hand.

let me see that bag, snapped the old man.

the bag is mineit belonged to my mother, explained the boy. surely
you dont object to my taking it with me?

youre welcome to it, and good riddance; but im going to find out
whats inside of it.

you surely dont think i would take anything that doesnt belong to
meyou cant mean that?

aint saying what i mean. hand over that bag.

with burning cheeks, phil did as he was bid, his unwavering eyes fixed
almost sternly on the wrathful face of abner adams.

huh! growled the old man, tumbling the contents out on the floor,
shaking phils clothes to make sure that nothing was concealed in them.

apparently satisfied, the old man threw the bag on the floor with an
exclamation of disgust. phil once more gathered up his belongings and
stowed them away in the satchel.

turn out your pockets!

there is nothing in them, uncle, save some trinkets of my own and my
mothers picture.

turn them out! thundered the old man.

uncle, i have always obeyed you. obedience was one of the things that
my mother taught me, but im sure that were she here she would tell me
i was right in refusing to humiliate myself as you would have me do.
there is nothing in my pockets that does not belong to me. i am not a
thief.

then ill turn them out myself! snarled abner adams, starting
forward.

phil stepped back a pace, satchel in hand.

uncle, i am a man now, said the boy, straightening to his full
height. please dont force me to do something that i should be sorry
for all the rest of my life. will you shake hands with me?

no! thundered abner adams. get out of my sight before i lay the
stick over your head!

phil stretched out an appealing hand, then hastily withdrew it.

good-bye, uncle abner, he breathed.

without giving his uncle a chance to reply, the lad turned, opened the
door and ran down the steps.




chapter iii.
making his start in the world


the sun was just setting as phil forrest strode out of the yard. once
outside of the gate he paused, glancing irresolutely up and down the
street. which way to turn or where to go he did not know. he had not
thought before of what he should do.

phil heard the clatter of abner adams stick as the old man thumped
about in the kitchen.

suddenly the door was jerked open with unusual violence.

begone! bellowed mr. adams, brandishing his cane threateningly.

phil turned down the street, without casting so much as a glance in the
direction of his wrathful uncle, and continued on toward the open
country. to anyone who had observed him there was nothing of
uncertainty in the lads walk as he swung along. as a matter of fact,
phil had not the slightest idea where he was going. he knew only that
he wanted to get away by himself.

on the outskirts of the village men had been at work that day, cutting
and piling up hay. the field was dotted with heaps of the fragrant,
freshly garnered stuff.

phil hesitated, glanced across the field, and, noting that the men had
all gone home for the day, climbed the fence. he walked on through the
field until he had reached the opposite side of it. then the lad placed
his bag on the ground and sat down on a pile of hay.

with head in hands, he tried to think, to plan, but somehow his mind
seemed unable to perform its proper functions. it simply would not
work.

not much of a start in the world, this, grinned phil, shifting his
position so as to command a better view of the world, for he did not
want anyone to see him. i suppose uncle abner is getting supper now.
but where am i going to get mine? i hadnt thought of that before. it
looks very much as if i should have to go without. but i dont care.
perhaps it will do me good to miss a meal, decided the boy
sarcastically. ive been eating too much lately, anyhow.

twilight came; then the shadows of night slowly settled over the
landscape, while the lad lay stretched out on the sweet-smelling hay,
hands supporting his head, gazing up into the starlit sky.

slowly his heavy eyelids fluttered and closed, and phil was asleep. the
night was warm and he experienced no discomfort. he was a strong,
healthy boy, so that sleeping out of doors was no hardship to him. all
through the night he slept as soundly as if he had been in his own bed
at home. nor did he awaken until the bright sunlight of the morning
finally burned his eyelids apart.

phil started up rubbing his eyes.

at first he wondered where he was. but the sight of his bag lying a
little to one side brought back with a rush the memory of what had
happened to him the evening before.

why, its morning, marveled the lad, blinking in the strong sunlight.
and ive slept on this pile of hay all night. its the first time i
ever slept out of doors, and i never slept better in my life. guess
ill fix myself up a little.

phil remembered that a little trout stream cut across the field off to
the right. taking up his bag, he started for the stream, where he made
his toilet as best he could, finishing up by lying flat on his stomach,
taking a long, satisfying drink of the sparkling water.

ah, that feels better, he breathed, rolling over on the bank. after a
little he helped himself to another drink. but ive got to do
something. i cant stay out here in this field all the rest of my life.
and if i dont find something to eat ill starve to death. ill go
downtown and see if i cant earn my breakfast somehow.

having formed this resolution, phil took up his belongings and started
away toward the village. his course led him right past abner adams
house, but, fortunately, mr. adams was not in sight. phil would have
felt a keen humiliation had he been forced to meet the taunts of his
uncle. he hurried on past the house without glancing toward it.

he had gone on for some little way when he was halted by a familiar
voice.

hello, phil! where are you going in such a hurry and so early in the
morning?

phil started guiltily and looked up quickly at the speaker.

good morning, mrs. cahill. what time is it?

its just past four oclock in the morning.

gracious! i had no idea it was so early as that, exclaimed the lad.

if you are not in such a great hurry, stop a bit, urged the woman,
her keen eyes noting certain things that she did not give voice to. she
had known phil forrest for many years, and his parents before him.
furthermore, she knew something of the life he had led since the death
of his parents. had your breakfast?

well

of course you havent. come right in and eat with me, urged the
good-hearted widow.

if you will let me do some chores, or something to pay for it, i
will, agreed phil hesitatingly.

nothing of the kind! youll keep me company at breakfast; then youll
be telling me all about it.

about what?

 bout your going away, pointing significantly to the bag that phil
was carrying.

he was ravenously hungry, though he did not realize it fully until the
odor of the widows savory cooking smote his nostrils.

she watched him eat with keen satisfaction.

now tell me whats happened, urged mrs. cahill, after he had finished
the meal.

phil did so. he opened his heart to the woman who had known his mother,
while she listened in sympathetic silence, now and then uttering an
exclamation of angry disapproval when his uncles words were repeated
to her.

and youre turned out of house and home? is that it, my boy?

well, yes, thats about it, grinned phil.

its a shame.

im not complaining, you know, mrs. cahill. perhaps its the best
thing that could have happened to me. ive got to start out for myself
sometime, you know. im glad of one thing, and that is that i didnt
have to go until school closed. i get through the term today, you
know?

and youre going to school today?

oh, yes. i wouldnt want to miss the last day.

then what?

i dont know. i shall find something else to do, i guess. i want to
earn enough money this summer so that i can go to school again in the
fall.

and you shall. you shall stay right here with the widow cahill until
youve got through with your schooling, my lad.

i couldnt think of that. no; i am not going to be a burden to anyone.
dont you see how i feelthat i want to earn my own living now?

she nodded understandingly.

you can do some chores and

ill stay here until i find something else to do, agreed phil slowly.
i shant be able to look about much today, because ill be too busy at
school; but tomorrow ill begin hunting for a job. what can i do for
you this morning?

well, you might chop some wood if you are aching to exercise your
muscles, answered the widow, with a twinkle in her eyes. she knew that
there was plenty of wood stored in the woodhouse, but she was too
shrewd an observer to tell phil so, realizing, as she did, that the
obligation he felt for her kindness was too great to be lightly
treated.

phil got at his task at once, and in a few moments she heard him
whistling an accompaniment to the steady thud, thud of the axe as he
swung it with strong, resolute arms.

hes a fine boy, was the widow cahills muttered conclusion.

phil continued at his work without intermission until an hour had
passed. mrs. cahill went out, begging that he come in and rest.

rest? why, havent i been resting all night? i feel as if i could chop
down the house and work it up into kindling wood, all before school
time. what time is it?

nigh on to seven oclock. ive wanted to ask you something ever since
you told me you had left abner adams. its rather a personal question.

the lad nodded.

did your uncle send you away without any money?

of course. why should he have given me anything so long as i was going
to leave him?

did you ever hear him say that your mother had left a little money
with him before she diedmoney that was to be used for your education
as long as it lasted?

phil straightened up slowly, his axe falling to the ground, an
expression of surprise appeared in his eyes.

my mother left moneyfor me, you say? he wondered.

no, phil, i havent said so. i asked you if abner had ever said
anything of the sort?

no. do you think she did?

im not saying what i think. i wish i was a man; id read old abner
adams a lecture that he wouldnt forget as long as he lives.

phil smiled indulgently.

hes an old man, mrs. cahill. hes all crippled up with rheumatism,
and maybe hes got a right to be cranky

and to turn his own sisters child outdoors, eh? not by a long shot.
rheumatics dont give anybody any call to do any such a thing as that.
he ought to have his nose twisted, and its me, a good church member,
as says so.

the lad picked up his axe and resumed his occupation, while mrs. cahill
turned up a chunk of wood and sat down on it, keeping up a running fire
of comment, mostly directed at abner adams, and which must have made
his ears burn.

shortly after eight oclock phil gathered his books, strapped them and
announced that he would be off for school.

ill finish the woodpile after school, he called back, as he was
leaving the gate.

youll do nothing of the sort, retorted the widow cahill.

darting out of the yard, phil ran plump into someone, and halted
sharply with an earnest apology.

seems to me youre in a terrible rush about something. where you
going?

hello, teddy, that you?

its me, answered teddy ungrammatically.

im on my way to school.

never could understand why anybody should want to run when hes going
to school. now, i always run when i start off after schools out. what
you doing here? demanded the boy, drawing his eyelids down into a
squint.

ive been chopping some wood for mrs. cahill.

huh! whats the matter with the bear this morning?

the bear?

teddy jerked a significant thumb in the direction of phils former
home.

bears got a grouch on a rod wide this morning.

oh, you mean uncle abner, answered phil, his face clouding.

yep.

why?

i just dropped in to see if you were ready to go to school. he yelled
at me like hed gone crazy.

that all? grinned the other boy.

no. he chased me down the road till his game knee gave out; then he
fell down.

phil could not repress a broad grin at this news.

good thing for me that i could run. hed have given me a walloping for
sure if hed caught me. ill bet that stick hurts when it comes down on
a fellow. dont it, phil?

i should think it would. i have never felt it, but i have had some
pretty narrow escapes. what did the folks you are living with say when
you got home all mud last night?

teddy grinned a sheepish sort of grin.

told me id better go out in the horse barnsaid my particular style
of beauty was better suited to the stable than to the kitchen.

did you?

well, no, not so as you might notice it. i went down to the creek and
went in swimming, clothes and all. that was the easiest way. you see, i
could wash the mud off my clothes and myself all at the same time.

its a wonder they let you in at all, then.

they didnt; at least not until i had wrung the water out of my
trousers and twisted my hair up into a regular top-knot. then i crawled
in behind the kitchen stove and got dried out after a while. but i got
my supper. i always do.

yes; i never knew you to go without meals.

sorry you aint going to the circus tomorrow, phil.

i am. teddy, im free. i can do as i like now. yes, ill go to the
circus with you, and maybe if i can earn some money tonight ill treat
you to red lemonade and peanuts.

hooray! shouted teddy, tossing his hat high in the air.




chapter iv.
the circus comes to town


the sparling combined shows came rumbling into edmeston at about three
oclock the next morning. but, early as was the hour, two boys sat on
the widow cahills door-yard fence watching the wagons go by.

the circus was one of the few road shows that are now traveling through
the country, as distinguished from the great modern organizations that
travel by rail with from one to half a dozen massive trains. the
sparling people drove from town to town. they carried twenty-five
wagons, besides a band wagon, a wild-west coach and a calliope.

phil! phil! look! exclaimed teddy, clutching at his companions coat
sleeve, as two hulking, swaying figures appeared out of the shadows of
the early morning.

where?

there.

elephants! theres two of them.

aint that great? i didnt suppose theyd have any elephants. wonder
if theres any lions and tigers in those big wagons.

of course there are. didnt you see pictures of them on the bills,
teddy?

i dont know. dan marts, the postmaster, says you cant set any store
by the pictures. he says maybe theyve got the things you see in the
pictures, and maybe they havent. theres a camel! look at it! howd
you like to ride on that hump all day? questioned teddy gleefully.

shouldnt like it at all.

i read in my geography that they ride on them all the time on
theonon sarahs desert.

oh, you mean the sahara desertthats what you mean, laughed phil.

well, maybe.

i should rather ride an elephant. see, its just like a rocking chair.
i could almost go to sleep watching them move along.

i couldnt, declared teddy. i couldnt any more go to sleep when a
circus is going by than i could fly without wings.

see, there comes a herd of ponies. look how small they are. not much
bigger than st. bernard dogs. they could walk right under the elephants
and not touch them.

where do they all sleep? wondered teddy.

who, the ponies?

no, of course not. the people.

i dont know unless they sleep in the cages with the animals, laughed
phil. some of the folks appear to be sleeping on the horses.

id be willing to go without sleep if i could be a showman, mused
teddy. wouldnt you?

sure, agreed phil. hello! there come some more wagons. come on!
well run down to meet them.

no; lets go over to the grounds where the circus is coming off.
theyll be putting up the tents first thing we know.

thats so, and i want to be around. you going to work any, teddy?

not i. im going to see the show, but you dont catch me carrying
pails of water for the elephants for a ticket of admission that dont
admit you to anything except a stand-up. i can stand up cheaper than
that.

both boys slipped from the fence, and, setting off at a jog trot, began
rapidly overhauling and passing the slow-moving wagons with their tired
horses and more tired drivers.

by the time teddy and phil reached the circus grounds several wagons
were already there. shouts sprang up from all parts of the field, while
half a dozen men began measuring off the ground in the dim morning
light, locating the best places in which to pitch the tents. here and
there they would drive in a stake, on one of which they tied a piece of
newspaper.

wonder what thats for, thought phil aloud.

hey, whats the paper tied on the peg for? shouted teddy to a passing
showman.

thats the front door, sonny.

funniest looking front door i ever saw, grunted teddy.

he means thats the place where the people enter and leave their
tickets.

oh, yes. thats what they call the main entrance, nodded teddy.
ive seen it, but i dont usually go in that way.

with the early dawn figures began emerging from several of the wagons.
they were a sleepy looking lot, and for a time stood about in various
attitudes, yawning, stretching their arms and rubbing their eyes.

hey, boy, what town is this? questioned a red-haired youth, dragging
himself toward the two lads.

edmeston.

oh, yes. i remember; i was here once before.

with a show? asked teddy.

yes, with a kickapoo indian medicine man. and he was bad medicine.
say, where can i wash my countenance?

come on; ill show you, exclaimed teddy and phil in the same breath.

they led the way to the opposite side of the field, where there was a
stream of water. while the circus boy was making his morning toilet the
lads watched him in admiring silence.

what do you do? ventured phil.

i perform on the rings.

up in the air?

uh-huh.

ever fall off?

i get my bumps, grinned the red-haired boy. my name is rodney
palmer. whats your names?

they told him.

were going to be circus men, too, teddy informed him, but the
announcement did not seem to stir a deep interest in the circus boy. he
had heard other boys say the same thing. is it very hard work?

worst ever.

when do you sleep?

when we aint awake.

and you perform on the flying rings?

rodney nodded his head indifferently.

i should think youd burn the tent up with that head of red hair,
grinned teddy.

instead of getting angry at the boys thrust, rodney glanced at teddy
with a half questioning look in his eyes, then burst out laughing.

youre a cheerful idiot, arent you? he twinkled. ill tell you why
i dont. confidentially, you know?

sure.

i wear a wig when im performing. mebby if it wasnt for that i might
set something on fire. i must get over on the lot now.

youre in a lot already, teddy informed him.

we call the place where we pitch the tents the lot. the cook tent
must be up by this time, and im half starved. the performance was so
late yesterday afternoon that they had the cook tent down before i got
my supper. will you come along?

they did.

do you think there is anything i could do to earn a ticket to the show
today? asked phil.

yes, theres most always something for a boy to do.

whom do i ask about it?

go see the boss canvasman. ill point him out to you as we go along.

thank you. you want to see him, too, teddy?

no; i dont have to.

thats him over there. hes a grouch, but just dont let him bluff
you. yes, the cook tents about ready. ill sneak in and hook something
before breakfast; then mebby ill come back and talk with you.

well look for you in the show this afternoon, said phil.

all right, if i see you ill swing my hand to you, rodney replied,
starting for the cook tent, where the meals were served to the show
people.

now, im going to see that boss canvasman, announced phil. see, they
are laying the pieces of the tents flat on the ground. i suppose they
fasten them all together when they get them placed, then raise them up
on the poles.

i guess so. i dont care much so long as i dont have to do it.

teddy tucker, actually you are the laziest boy i ever knew. why dont
you brace up?

dont i have just as good a time and better, than you do?

guess you do.

dont i get just as much to eat?

i presume so, admitted phil.

dont i see all the shows that come to town, and go to all the
picnics?

yes.

then, whats the use of being any moren lazy?

teddys logic was too much for his companion, and phil laughed
heartily.

look, the elephant is butting one of the wagons, cried teddy.

no, they are using the elephant to push the cage around in place. i
wonder whats in it, said phil.

a roar that fairly made the ground shake answered phils question. the
cage in question held a lion, and a big, ugly one if his voice was any
indication. the great elephant, when the cage was being placed, would,
at a signal from its keeper, place its ponderous head against one side
of the cage and push, while a driver would steer the wagon by taking
hold of the end of the tongue.

it was a novel sight for the two boys, and they watched it with the
keenest interest. a man dressed in riding clothes, carrying a short
crop in his hand, was observing the operations with equal interest. he
was james sparling, the proprietor and manager of the great combined
shows, but the lads were unaware of that fact. even had they known, it
is doubtful if mr. sparling would have been of sufficient attraction to
draw their attention from the working elephant.

all at once there was a warning shout from mr. sparling.

the men set up a yell, followed by a sudden scurrying from the
immediate vicinity of the cage that the elephant had been shunting
about.

stop it! brace it! bellowed the owner of the show, making frantic
motions with his free hand, cutting circles and dashes in the air with
the short crop held in the other.

whats the row? wondered teddy.

ii dont know, stammered phil.

the elephants tipping the lion cage over! shouted someone. run for
your lives!

for once in his life teddy tucker executed a lightning-like movement.
he was one of several dark streaks on the landscape running as if
wallace, the biggest lion in captivity, were in reality hard upon his
heels. as he ran, teddy uttered a howl that could have been heard from
one end of the circus lot to the other.

a few of the more fearless ones, the old hands of the show, did not
attempt to run. instead they stood still, fairly holding their breaths,
waiting to see what would happen next.

mr. sparling was too far away to be able to do anything to prevent the
catastrophe that was hanging over them, but it did not prevent him from
yelling like a madman at the inactive employees of the show.

at the first crythe instant he comprehended what was happening phil
forrest moved every bit as quickly as had his companion, though he
leaped in the opposite direction.

all about on the ground lay tent poles of various length and thickness,
side poles, quarter poles and the short side poles used to hold the
tent walls in place. these were about twenty feet in length and light
enough to be easily handled.

with ready resourcefulness and quick comprehension, phil pounced upon
one of these and darted toward the cage which was toppling over in his
direction.

the roof of the lion cage that housed wallace projected over the edge
some six inches, and this had caught the keen eyes of the lad at the
first alarm. his plan had been formed in a flash.

he shot one end of the side pole up under the projecting roof, jammed
the other end into the ground, throwing his whole weight upon the foot
of the pole to hold it in place.

for an instant the tent pole bent like a bow under the pull of the
archer. it seemed as if it must surely snap under the terrific strain.

phil saw this, too. now that the foot of the pole was firmly imbedded
in the ground, there was no further need for him to hold it down. he
sprang under the pole with the swaying cage directly over him, grabbed
the pole at the point where it was arching so dangerously, and pulling
himself from the ground, held to the slippery stick desperately.

light as he was the boys weight saved the pole. it bent no further.

the cage swayed from side to side, threatening to topple over at one
end or the other.

get poles under the ends, shouted the boy in a shrill voice. i cant
hold it here all day.

get poles, you lazy good-for-nothings! bellowed the owner. brace
those ends. look out for the elephant. dont you see hes headed for
the cage again?

orders flew thick and fast, but through it all phil forrest hung grimly
to the side pole, taking a fresh overhand hold, now and then, as his
palms slipped down the painted stick.

now that he had shown the way, others sprang to his assistance. half a
dozen poles were thrust up under the roof and the cage began slowly
settling back the other way.

hadnt you better have some poles braced against the other side, sir?
suggested phil, touching his hat to mr. sparling, who, he had
discovered, was some person in authority. the cage may tip clear over
on the other side, or it may drop so heavily on the wheels as to break
the axles.

right. brace the off side. thats right. now let it down slowly. not
so hard on the nigh side there. ease off there, bill. push, patsy. what
do you think this isa game of croquet? there you go. right. now lets
see if you woodenheads know enough to keep the wagon right side up.

mr. sparling took off his hat and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead, while phil stood off calmly surveying the men who were
straightening the wagon, but with more caution than they had exercised
before.

come here, boy.

someone touched phil on the arm.

what is it?

boss wants to speak to you.

who?

boss sparling, the fellow over there with the big voice and the
sombrero.

phil walked over and touched his hat to mr. sparling.

the showman looked the lad over from head to foot.

whats your name? he shot the question at the lad as if angry about
something, and he undoubtedly was.

phil forrest.

do they grow your kind around here?

i cant say, sir.

if they do, id like to hire a dozen or more of them. youve got more
sense than any boy of your age i ever saw. how old are you?

sixteen.

huh! i wish i had him! growled mr. sparling. what do you want?

i should like to have a chance to earn a pass to the show this
afternoon. rodney palmer said the boss canvasman might give me a chance
to earn one.

earn one? earn one? mr. sparlings voice rose to a roar again. what
in the name of old dan rice do you think youve been doing? here youve
kept a cage with a five-thousand-dollar lion from tipping over, to say
nothing of the people who might have been killed had the brute got out,
and you want to know how you can earn a pass to the show? what dye
think of that? and the owner appealed helplessly to an assistant who
had run across the lot, having been attracted to the scene by the
uproar.

the assistant grinned.

hes too modest to live.

pity modesty isnt more prevalent in this show, then. how many do you
want? have a whole section if you say the word.

how many are there in a section? asked phil.

 bout a hundred seats.

phil gasped.

ii guess two will be enough, he made answer.

here you are, snapped the owner, thrusting a card at the lad, on
which had been scribbled some characters, puzzling to the uninitiated.
if you want anything else around this show you just ask for it, young
man. hey, there! going to be all day getting that canvas up? dont you
know weve got a parade coming along in a few hours?

phil forrest, more light of heart than in many days, turned away to
acquaint his companion of his good fortune. teddy tucker was making his
way cautiously back to the scene of the excitement of a few moments
before.

did he get away? teddy questioned, ready to run at the drop of the
hat should the danger prove to be still present.

who, the manager?

no, the lion.

hes in the cage where hes been all the time. they havent opened it
yet, but i guess hes all right. say, teddy!

say it.

ive got a pass to the show for two people for both performancesthis
afternoon and tonight.

the interest that the announcement brought to teddys eyes died away
almost as soon as it appeared.

going?

am i going? i should say so. want to go in with me on my pass, teddy?

the lad hitched his trousers, took a critical squint at the canvas that
was slowly mounting the center pole to the accompaniment of creaking
ropes, groaning tackle and confused shouting.

theyre getting the menagerie tent up. ill bet its going to be a
dandy show, he vouchsafed. howd you get the tickets?

manager gave them to me.

what for?

i did a little work for him. helped get the lions cage straightened
up. how about itare you going in on my pass?

n-o-o, drawled teddy. might get me into bad habits to go in on a
pass. id rather sneak in under the tent when the boss isnt looking.




chapter v.
when the bands played


phil started for the widow cahills on the run after having procured
his tickets. heres a ticket for the circus, mrs. cahill, he shouted,
bursting into the room, with excited, flushed face.

whats this you saythe circus? land sakes, i havent seen one since i
waswell, since i was a girl. i dont know.

youll go, wont you? urged phil.

of course, ill go, she made haste to reply, noting the
disappointment in his face over her hesitation. and thank you very
much.

shall i come and get you, mrs. cahill, or can you get over to the
circus grounds alone?

dont worry about me, my boy. ill take care of myself.

your seat will be right next to mine, and we can talk while we are
watching the performers.

yes; you run along now. heres a quarter for spending money. never
mind thanking me. just take it and have a good time. wheres your
friend?

teddy?

yes.

over on the lot.

he going in with you, too?

oh, no. teddy is too proud to go in that way. he crawls in under the
tent, laughed phil, running down the steps and setting off for the
circus grounds with all speed.

when he arrived there he saw at once that something was going on. the
tents were all in place, the little white city erected with as much
care and attention to detail as if the show expected to remain in
edmeston all summer. the lad could scarcely make himself believe that,
only a few hours before, this very lot had been occupied by the birds
alone. it was a marvel to him, even in after years, when he had become
as thoroughly conversant with the details of a great show as any man in
america.

just now there was unusual activity about the grounds. men in gaudy
uniforms, clowns in full makeup, and women with long glistening trains,
glittering with spangles from head to feet, were moving about, while
men were decorating the horses with bright blankets and fancy
headdress.

what are they going to do? asked phil of a showman.

going to parade.

oh, yes, thats so; i had forgotten about that.

hello, boyive forgotten your name

forrest, explained phil, turning. the speaker was mr. sparlings
assistant, whom the lad had seen just after saving the lion cage from
turning over.

can you blow a horn as well as you can stop a wagon?

depends upon what kind of a horn. i think i can make as much noise on
a fish horn as anyone else.

thatll do as well as anything else. want to go in the parade?

id love to! the color leaped to the cheeks of phil forrest and a
sparkle to his eyes. this was going beyond his fondest dreams.

the assistant motioned to a clown.

fix this boy up in some sort of a rig. im going to put him in the
kazoo band. bring him back here when he is ready. be quick.

a long, yellow robe was thrown about the boy, a peaked cap thrust on
his head, after which a handful of powder was slapped on his face and
rubbed down with the flat of the clowns hand. the fine dust got into
the lads nostrils and throat, causing him to sneeze until the tears
rolled down his cheeks, streaking his makeup like a freshet through a
plowed field.

good, laughed the clown. thats what your face needs. youd make a
good understudy for chief rain-in-the-face. now hustle along.

phil picked up the long skirts and ran full speed to the place where
the assistant had been standing. there he waited until the assistant
returned from a journey to some other part of the lot.

thats right; you know how to obey orders, he nodded. thats a good
clown makeup. did mr. miaco put those streaks on your face?

no, i sneezed them there, answered phil, with a sheepish grin.

the assistant laughed heartily. somehow, he had taken a sudden liking
to this boy.

do you live at home, forrest?

no; i have no home now.

heres a fish horn. now get up in the band wagonno, not the big one,
i mean the clowns band wagon with the hayrack on it. when the parade
starts blow your confounded head off if you want to. make all the noise
you can. youll have plenty of company. when the parade breaks up, just
take off your makeup and turn it over to mr. miaco.

you mean these clothes?

yes. theyre a part of the makeup. youll have to wash the makeup off
your face. i dont expect you to return the powder to us, grinned the
assistant humorously.

the clowns were climbing to the hayrack. a bugle had blown as a signal
that the parade was ready to move. phil had not seen teddy tucker since
returning to the lot. he did not know where the boy was, but he was
quite sure that teddy was not missing any of the fun. tucker had been
around circuses before, and knew how to make the most of his
opportunities. and he was doing so now.

ta ra, ta ra, ta ra! sang the bugle.

crash! answered the cymbals and the bass drums. the snare drums buzzed
a long, thrilling roll; then came the blare of the brass as the whole
band launched into a lively tune such as only circus bands know how to
play.

the parade had begun to move.

it was a thrilling momentthe moment of all moments of phil forrests
life.

the clowns wagon had been placed well back in the line, so as not to
interfere with the music of the band itself. but phil did not care
where he was placed. he only knew that he was in a circus parade, doing
his part with the others, and that, so far as anyone knew, he was as
much a circus man as any of them.

as the cavalcade drew out into the main street and straightened away,
phil was amazed to see what a long parade it was. it looked as if it
might reach the whole length of the village.

the spring sun was shining brightly, lighting up the line, transforming
it into a moving, flashing, brilliant ribbon of light and color.

splendid! breathed the boy, removing the fish horn from his lips for
a brief instant, then blowing with all his might again.

as the wagons moved along he saw many people whom he knew. as a matter
of fact, phil knew everyone in the village, but there were hundreds of
people who had driven in from the farms whom he did not know. nor did
anyone appear to recognize him.

if they only knew, wouldnt they be surprised? chuckled the lad.
hello, theres mrs. cahill.

the widow was standing on her front door step with a dishtowel in one
hand.

in the excess of his excitement, phil stood up, waving his horn and
yelling.

she heard himas everybody else within a radius of a quarter of a mile
might haveand she recognized the voice. mrs. cahill brandished the
dishtowel excitedly.

hes a fine boy, she glowed. and hes having the first good time
hes had in five years.

the widow cahill was right. for the first time in all these years,
since the death of his parents, phil forrest was carefree and perfectly
happy.

the clowns on the wagon with him were uproariously funny. when the
wagon stopped now and then, one whom phil recognized as the head clown,
mr. miaco, would spring to the edge of the rack and make a stump speech
in pantomime, accompanied by all the gestures included in the pouring
and drinking of a glass of water. so humorous were the clowns antics
that the spectators screamed with laughter.

suddenly the lad espied that which caused his own laughter to die away,
and for the moment he forgot to toot the fish horn. the parade was
passing his former home, and there, standing hunched forward, leaning
on his stick and glaring at the procession from beneath bushy eyebrows,
stood phils uncle, abner adams.

phils heart leaped into his throat; at least that was the sensation
that he experienced.

ii hope he doesnt know me, muttered the lad, shrinking back a
little. but im a man now. i dont care. hes driven me out and he has
no right to say a thing.

the lad lost some of his courage, however, when the procession halted,
and he found that his wagon was directly in front of mr. adams
dooryard, with his decrepit uncle not more than twenty feet away from
him. the surly, angry eyes of abner adams seemed to be burning through
phils makeup, and the lad instinctively shrank back ever so little.

however, at that instant the boys attention was attracted to another
part of the wagon. the head clown stepped from the wagon and, with
dignified tread, approached abner adams. he grasped the old man by the
hand, which he shook with great warmth, making a courtly bow.

at first abner adams was too surprised to protest. then, uttering an
angry snarl, he threw the clown off, making a vicious pass at him with
his heavy stick.

the clown dodged the blow, and made a run for the wagon, which was now
on the move again.

phil breathed a sigh of relief. the people had roared at the funny
sight of the clown shaking hands with the crabbed old man; but to phil
forrest there had been nothing of humor in it. the sight of his uncle
brought back too many unhappy memories.

the lad soon forgot his depression, however, in the rapid changes that
followed each other in quick succession as on a moving- picture film.

reaching the end of the village street the procession was obliged to
turn and retrace its steps over the same ground until it reached the
business part of the town, where it would turn off and pass through
some of the side streets.

now there were two lines, moving in opposite directions. this was of
interest to phil, enabling him, as it did, to get a good look at the
other members of the troupe. mr. sparling was riding ahead in a
carriage drawn by four splendid white horses, driven by a coachman
resplendent in livery and gold lace, while the bobbing plumes on the
heads of the horses added to the impressiveness of the picture.

id give anything in the world to be able to ride in a carriage like
that, decided phil. maybe someday i shall. well see.

now came the elephants, lumbering along on velvet feet. on the second
one there crouched a figure that somehow seemed strangely familiar to
phil forrest. the figure was made up to represent a huge frog.

a peculiar gesture of one of the frogs legs revealed the identity of
the figure beneath the mask.

teddy! howled phil.

have a frogs leg, retorted teddy, shaking one of them vigorously at
the motley collection of clowns.

not eating frogs legs today, jeered a clown, as teddy went swinging
past them, a strange, grotesque figure on the back of the huge, hulking
beast.

the clowns wagon was just on the point of turning when the men heard a
loud uproar far down the line. at first they thought it was a part of
the show, but it soon became apparent that something was wrong.

phil instinctively let the horn fall away from his lips. he peered
curiously over the swaying line to learn what, if anything, had gone
wrong.

he made out the cause of the trouble almost at once. a pony with a
woman on its back had broken from the line, and was plunging toward
them at a terrific pace. she appeared to have lost all control of the
animal, and the pony, which proved to be an ugly broncho, was bucking
and squealing as it plunged madly down the street.

the others failed to see what phil had observed almost from the first.
the bit had broken in the mouth of the broncho and the reins hung
loosely in the womans helpless hands.

they were almost up with the clowns wagon when the woman was seen to
sway dizzily in her saddle, as the leather slipped beneath her. then
she plunged headlong to the ground.

instead of falling in a heap, the circus woman, with head dragging,
bumping along the ground, was still fast to the pony.

her foot is caught in the stirrup! yelled half a dozen men at once,
but not a man of them made an effort to rescue her. perhaps this was
because none of the real horsemen of the show were near enough to do
so.

mr. sparling, however, at the first alarm, had leaped from his
carriage, and, thrusting a rider from his mount, sprang into the saddle
and came tearing down the line in a cloud of dust. he was bearing down
on the scene at express train speed.

the woman will be killed!

stop him! stop him!

stop him yourself!

but not a man made an effort to do anything.

it had all occurred in a few seconds, but rapidly as the events
succeeded each other, phil forrest seemed to be the one among them who
retained his presence of mind.

he fairly launched himself into the air as the ugly broncho shot
alongside the clowns wagon.




chapter vi.
proving his mettle


familiar as they were with daring deeds, those of the circus people who
witnessed phil forrests dive gasped.

they expected to see the boy fall beneath the feet of the plunging
pony, where he would be likely to be trampled and kicked to death.

but phil had looked before he leaped. he had measured his distance
wellhad made up his mind exactly what he was going to do, or rather
what he was going to try to do.

the pony, catching a brief glimpse of the dark figure that was being
hurled through the air directly toward him, made a swift leap to one
side. but the animal was not quick enough. the boy landed against the
broncho with a jolt that nearly knocked the little animal over, while
to phil the impact could not have been much more severe, it seemed to
him, had he collided with a locomotive.

hang on! howled a voice from the wagon.

that was exactly what he intended to do.

the cloud of dust, with mr. sparling in the center of it, had not
reached them, but his keen eyes already had observed what was going on.

g-g-g-grab the woman! shouted phil.

his left arm had been thrown about the bronchos neck, while his right
hand was groping frantically for the animals nose. but during all this
time the pony was far from idle. he was plunging like a ship in a gale,
cracking the whip with phil forrest until it seemed as if every bone in
the lads body would be broken. he could hear his own neck snap with
every jerk.

with a howl miaco, the head clown, launched himself from the wagon,
too. darting in among the flying hoofsthere seemed to be a score of
themhe caught the woman, jerked her foot free of the stirrup and
dragged her quickly from her perilous position.

shes free. let go! he roared to the boy holding the pony.

but by this time phil had fastened his right hand on the ponys
nostrils, and with a quick pressure shut off the animals wind. he had
heard the warning cry. the lads grit had been aroused, however, and he
was determined that he would not let go until he should have conquered
the fighting broncho.

with a squeal of rage, the pony leaped sideways. a deep ditch led along
by the side of the road, but this the enraged animal had not noticed.
into it he went, kicking and fighting, pieces of phils yellow robe
streaming from his hoofs.

the lads body was half under the neck of the pony, but he was clinging
to the neck and the nose of the beast with desperate courage.

get the boy out of there! thundered mr. sparling, dashing up and
leaping from his pony. want to let him be killed?

by this time others had ridden up, and some of the real horsemen in the
outfit sprang off and rushed to phil forrests assistance. ropes were
cast over the flying hoofs before the men thought it wise to get near
them. then they hauled phil out, very much the worse for wear.

in the meantime mr. sparlings carriage had driven up and he was
helping the woman in.

is the boy hurt? he called.

no, im all right, thank you, answered phil, smiling bravely, though
he was bruised from head to foot and his clothing hung in tatters. his
peaked clowns cap someone picked up in a field over the fence and
returned to him. that was about all that was left of phil forrests
gaudy makeup, save the streaks on his face, which by now had become
blotches of white and red.

the clowns picked him up and boosted him to the wagon, jabbering like a
lot of sparrows perched on a telephone wire.

see you later! shouted the voice of mr. sparling as he drove rapidly
away.

phil found his horn, and despite his aches and pains he began blowing
it lustily. the story of his brave rescue had gone on ahead, however,
and as the clowns wagon moved on it was greeted by tremendous
applause.

the onlookers had no difficulty in picking out the boy who had saved
the womans life, and somehow the word had been passed around as to his
identity.

hooray for phil forrest! shouted the multitude.

phil flushed under the coating of powder and paint, and sought to
crouch down in the wagon out of sight.

here, get up there where they can see you! admonished a clown. if
youre going to be a showman you mustnt be afraid to get yourself in
the spotlight.

two of them hoisted the blushing phil to their shoulders and broke into
a rollicking song, swaying their bodies in imitation of the movements
of an elephant as they sang.

at this the populace fairly howled with delight.

hes the boy, even if he aint purty to look at, jeered someone in
the crowd.

handsome is as handsome does! retorted a clown in a loud voice, and
the people cheered.

after this the parade went on without further incident, though there
could be no doubt that the exciting dash and rescue by one of their own
boys had aroused the town to a high pitch of excitement. and the
showmen smiled, for they knew what that meant.

bet well have a turn-away this afternoon, announced a clown.

looks that way, agreed another, and all on account of the kid.

whats a turn-away? asked phil.

thats when there are more people want to get in than the tent will
hold. and it means, too, that the boss will be good natured till it
rains again, and the wagons get stuck in the mud so that well make the
next town behind time. at such times he can make more noise than the
steam calliope.

he seems to me to be a pretty fine sort of a man, even if he is
gruff, suggested phil.

the best ever, agreed several clowns. youll look a long way before
youll find a better showman, or a better man to his help, than jim
sparling. ever been in the show business, kid?

phil shook his head.

anybodyd think you always had been, the way you take hold of things.
ill bet youll be in it before you are many years older.

id like to, glowed the lad.

ask the boss.

no, he wouldnt want me. there is nothing i could do now, i guess.

further conversation was interrupted by the bugles song announcing the
disbanding of the parade, the right of the line having already reached
the circus lot.

the clowns piled from the hayrack like a cataract, the cataract having
all the colors of the rainbow.

phil, not to be behind, followed suit, though he did not quite
understand what the rush was about. he ran until he caught up with
miaco.

whats the hurry about? he questioned.

parades over. got to hurry and get dinner, so as to be ready for the
afternoon performance.

all hands were heading for the dressing tent in a mad rush.

phil was halted by the assistant manager.

the lad glanced down rather sheepishly at his costume, which was
hanging in tatters, then up at the quizzically smiling face of the
showman.

iim sorry ive spoiled it, sir, but i couldnt help it.

dont worry about that, young man. how did it happen? he questioned,
pretending not to know anything about the occurrence in which phil had
played a leading part.

well, you see, there was a horse ran away, and i happened to get in
the way of it. i

yes, forrest, i understand all about it. somebody did something to
that animal to make it run away and the boss is red headed over it.

ii didnt.

no, thats right. it was lucky that there was one person in the parade
who had some sense left, or there would have been a dead woman with
this outfit, growled the assistant.

was she badly hurt?

no. only bruised up a bit. these show people get used to hard knocks.

im glad she is all right. who is she?

dont you know?

no.

that was mr. sparlings wife whose life you saved, and i reckon the
boss will have something to say to you when he gets sight of you
again.




chapter vii.
making friends with the elephants


is it possible? i didnt know that, marveled the boy. and does she
perform?

everybody works in this outfit, young man, laughed the assistant, as
you will learn if you hang around long enough. going to the show?

yes, sir.

got seats?

mr. sparling provided me with tickets, thank you. but ive got to get
home first and put on some other clothes. this suit is about done for,
isnt it?

i should say it was. you did that stopping the horse, didnt you?

phil nodded.

boss will buy you a new suit for that.

oh, no; i couldnt allow him to do that, objected phil.

well, you are a queer youngster. so long. ill see you when you come
in this afternoon. wait, let me see your tickets.

the lad handed them over wonderingly, at which his questioner nodded
approvingly.

theyre good seats. hope you will enjoy the show.

thank you; i am sure i shall, answered phil, touching his hat and
starting on a run for home.

arriving there, mrs. cahill met him and threw up her hands in horror
when she observed the condition of his clothes.

i am afraid they are gone for good, grinned phil rather ruefully.

no. you leave them with me. ill fix them up for you. i heard how you
saved that show womans life. that was fine, my boy. im proud of you,
that i am. you did more than all those circus men could do, and the
whole town is talking about it.

if you are going to the show you had better be getting ready, urged
phil, wishing to change the subject.

all right, i will. ill fix your clothes when i get back. will you be
home to supper?

i dont know for sure. if i can ill be back in time, but please dont
wait for me. here is your ticket.

the lad hurried to the room the good woman had set aside for him and
quickly made the change of clothing. he was obliged to change
everything he had on, for even his shirt had been torn in his battle
with the broncho. after bathing and putting on the fresh clothes, phil
hurried from the house, that he might miss nothing of the show.

the sideshow band was blaring brazenly when he reached the lot. the
space in front of the main entrance was packed with people, many of
whom pointed to him, nodding their heads and directing the attention of
their companions to the lad.

phil wished he might be able to skulk in by the back door and thus
avoid their attention, but as this was impossible, he pulled his hat
down over his eyes and worked his way slowly toward the front of the
crowd.

getting near the entrance, he saw mr. sparlings assistant. the latter,
chancing to catch sight of phil, motioned him to crawl under the ropes
and come in. the boy did so gratefully.

the doors are not open yet, but you may go in. you will have time to
look over the animals before the crowd arrives, then you can reach your
seat before the others get in. please let me see those checks once
more.

the assistant made a mental note of the section and number of the seats
for future reference and handed back the coupons.

phil stole into the menagerie tent, relieved to be away from the gaze
and comments of the crowd that was massed in front.

gracious, im afraid i wouldnt make a very good circus man. i hate to
have everybody looking at me as if i were some natural or unnatural
curiosity. wonder if i will know any of the show people when they are
made up, as they call it, and performing in the ring? i shouldnt
wonder if they didnt know me in my best clothes, though, grinned the
boy.

phil had had the forethought to bring a few lumps of sugar in his
pocket. entering the menagerie tent, he quickly made his way to the
place where the elephants were chained, giving each one of the big
beasts a lump. he felt no fear of them and permitted them to run their
sensitive trunks over him and into his pockets, where they soon found
the rest of the sugar.

after disposing of the sweets, both beasts emitted a loud trumpeting.
at such close quarters the noise they made seemed to shake the ground.

why do they do that? questioned phil of the keeper.

thats their way of thanking you for the sugar. youve made friends of
both of them for life. theyll never forget you, even if they dont see
you for several seasons.

do they like peanuts?

do they? just try them.

phil ran to a snack stand at the opposite side of the tent and bought
five cents worth of peanuts, then hurried back to the elephants with
the package.

what are their names?

the big one is emperor and the smaller one is called jupiter,
answered the keeper, who had already recognized his young visitor.

are they ever ugly?

never have been. but you cant tell. an elephant is liable to go bad
most any time, then you

but how can you tell, or cant you?

most always, unless they are naturally bad.

how do you know?

see that little slit on the cheek up there?

yes, said phil, peering at the great jowls wonderingly.

well, several days before they get in a tantrum you will see a few
tear dropsthats what i call themoozing from that little slit. i
dont know whether its water on the brain or what it is. but when you
see the tear drops you want to get from under and chain mr. elephant
down as quickly as possible.

that is strange.

very. but its a sure sign. never knew it to fail, and ive known some
elephants in my time. but emperor and jupiter never have shed a tear
drop since ive known them. they are not the crying kind, you know.

the lad nodded understandingly.

how about the lions and the tigerscan you tell when they are going to
have bad spells?

well, reflected the showman, its safe to say that theyve always
got a grouch on. the cats are always

cats?

yes. all that sort of animals belong to the cat family and theyve got
only one ambition in life.

whats that?

to kill somebody or something.

but their keepersdont they become fond of their keepers or
trainers?

the elephant tender laughed without changing the expression of his
face. his laugh was all inside of him, as phil characterized it.

not they! they may be afraid of their keeper, but they would as soon
chew him up as anybody elsei guess they would rather, for theyve
always got a bone to pick with him.

do any of the men go in the cages and make the animals perform here?

oh, yes. wallace, the big lion over there, performs every afternoon
and night. so does the tiger in the cage next to him.

phil had dumped the bag of peanuts into his hat, which he held out
before him while talking. two squirming trunks had been busy conveying
the peanuts to the pink mouths of their owners, so that by the time
phil happened to remember what he had brought them, there was not a nut
left in the hat.

he glanced up in surprise.

emperor, you are a greedy old elephant, laughed phil, patting the
trunk.

emperor trumpeted loudly, and the call was immediately taken up even
more loudly by his companion.

no, you cant have any more, chided phil. you will have indigestion
from what youve already eaten, im afraid. behave, and ill bring you
some more tonight if i come to the show, he laughed.

two caressing trunks touched his hands, then traveled gently over his
cheeks. they tickled, but phil did not flinch.

you could do most anything with them now, you see, nodded the keeper.
theyd follow you home if i would let them.

especially if my pockets were full of sweets.

theres the animal trainer getting ready to go into the lion cage, if
you want to see him, the attendant informed him.

yes, i should like to. and thank you very much for your kindness.

youre welcome. come around again.

the boy hurried over to the lion cage. the people were now crowding
into the menagerie tent in throngs. there seemed to phil to be
thousands already there. but all eyes now being centered on wallaces
cage, they had no time to observe phil, for which he was duly thankful.

the animal trainer, clad in red tights, his breast covered with
spangles, was already at the door of the cage, whip in hand. when a
sufficient crowd had gathered about him, he opened the door, and,
entering the cage threw wide the iron grating that shut wallace off
from the door end of the wagon. the big lion bounded out with a roar
that caused the people to crowd back instinctively.

then the trainer began putting the savage beast through its paces,
causing it to leap over his whip, jump through paper hoops, together
with innumerable other tricks that caused the spectators to open their
mouths in wonder. all the time wallace kept up a continual snarling,
interspersed now and then with a roar that might have been heard a
quarter of a mile away.

this was a part of the exhibition, as phil shrewdly discovered. the boy
was a natural showman, though unaware of the fact. he noted all the
little fine points of the trainers work with as much appreciation as
if he had himself been an animal trainer.

i half believe i should like to try that myself, was his mental
conclusion. but i should want to make the experiment on a very little
lion at first. if i got out with a whole skin i might want to tackle
something bigger. i wonder if he is going into the tiger cage?

as if in answer to his question, an announcer shouted out the
information that the trainer would give an exhibition in the cage of
the tiger just before the evening performance.

ill have to see that, muttered phil. guess i had better get in and
find my seat now.

at the same time the crowd, understanding that the lion performance was
over, began crowding into the circus tent.

the band inside swung off into a sprightly tune and phil could scarcely
repress the inclination to keep time to it with his feet. altogether,
things were moving pretty well with phil forrest. they had done so ever
since he left home the day before. in that one day he had had more fun
than had come to him in many years.

but his happy day would soon be ended. he sighed as he thought of it.
then his face broke out into a sunny smile as he caught a glimpse of
the ropes and apparatus, seen dimly through the afternoon haze, in the
long circus tent.

as he gained the entrance between the two large tents he saw the silk
curtains at the far end of the circus arena fall apart, while a troop
of gayly caparisoned horses and armored riders suddenly appeared
through the opening.

the grand entry was beginning.

gracious, here the show has begun and i am not anywhere near my seat,
he exclaimed. but, if i am going to be late i wont be alone. there
are a whole lot more of us that were too much interested in the animal
trainer to think to come in and get our seats. i guess i had better
run. i

phil started to run, but he got no further than the start.

all at once his waist was encircled in a powerful grip and he felt his
feet leaving the ground. phil was being raised straight up into the air
by some strange force, the secret of which he did not understand.




chapter viii.
in the sawdust arena


the lad repressed an inclination to cry out, for the thing that had
encircled his waist and raised him up seemed to be tightening about
him.

a familiar voice just behind him served to calm phils disquieted
nerves.

dont be frightened, kid. its only emperor having a little joke. hes
a funny fellow, said the elephants attendant.

phil had read somewhere that elephants possessed a keen sense of humor,
and now he was sure of it. but he never thought he would have an
opportunity to have the theory demonstrated on himself.

the elephants were on their way to participate in the grand entry, and
there was not a minute to spare now. emperor on his way into the other
tent had come across his new-found friend and recognized him instantly,
while phil had not even heard the approach of the elephants.

no sooner had the elephant discovered the lad than he picked him up
with his trunk, slowly hoisting the boy high in the air.

steady, emperor! steady! cautioned the attendant. but emperor needed
no admonition to deal gently with his young friend. he handled phil
with almost the gentleness of a mother lifting a babe.

phil forrest experienced a thrill that ran all through him when he
realized what was taking place.

we cant stop to put you down now, my boy. youll have to go through
the performance with us. grab the head harness when he lets you down on
his head. you can sit on the head without danger, but keep hold of the
harness with one hand. ill bet youll make a hit.

i will if i fall off, answered phil a bit unsteadily.

as it was, the unusual motion made him a little giddy.

thats a good stunt. stick to him, forrest, directed a voice as they
swept on toward the ring.

the voice belonged to mr. sparling, the owner of the show. he was quick
to grasp the value of phils predicamentthat is, its value to the show
as a drawing card.

by now the people began to understand that something unusual was going
on, and they asked each other what it was all about.

its phil forrest riding the elephant, shouted one of the lads
school friends, recognizing him all at once. hooray for phil!

there were many of the pupils from his school there, and the howling
and shouting that greeted him made the lads cheeks burn. but now,
instead of wanting to crawl under something and hide, phil felt a
thrill of pleasure, of pride in the achievement that was denied to all
the rest of his friends.

the inspiring music of the circus band, too, added to his exhilaration.
he felt like throwing up his hands and shouting.

suddenly he felt something tugging at his coat pocket, and glancing
down gave a start as he discovered the inquisitive trunk of emperor
thrust deep down in the pocket.

when the trunk came away it brought with it a lump of sugar that phil
did not know he possessed. the sugar was promptly conveyed to the
elephants mouth, the beast uttering a loud scream of satisfaction.

emperor, you rascal! laughed phil, patting the beast on the head.

once more the trunk curled up in search of more sugar, but a stern
command from the trainer caused the beast to lower it quickly. the time
for play had passed. the moment had arrived for emperor to do his work
and he was not the animal to shirk his act. in fact, he seemed to
delight in it. all elephants work better when they have with them some
human being or animal on which they have centered their affections.
sometimes it is a little black and tan dog, sometimes a full-grown man.
in this instance it happened to be a boy, and that boy phil forrest.

waltz! commanded the trainer.

if phils head had swum before, it spun like a top now. round and round
pirouetted the huge beasts, keeping in perfect step with the music of
the band, and tighter and tighter did the lad grip the head harness of
old emperor. phil closed his eyes after a little because he had grown
so dizzy that he feared he would fall off.

hang on, kid. itll be christmas by and by, comforted the trainer
humorously.

thats what i am trying to do, answered phil a bit unsteadily.

hows your head?

whirling like a merry-go-round.

he heard the trainer chuckling.

the spectators were shouting out phils name all over the big tent.

fine, fine! chuckled james sparling, rubbing his palms together.
that ought to fill the tent tonight.

the spectators realized, too, that they were being treated to something
not down on the bills and their shouts and laughter grew louder and
louder.

do you think you could stand up on his head? came the voice of the
trainer just loud enough for phil to hear.

me? stand on the elephants head?

yes. think you can do it?

if i had a net underneath to catch me, maybe id try it.

emperor wont let you fall. when i give the word hell wrap his trunk
around your legs. that will hold you steady from the waist down. if you
can keep the rest of yourself from lopping over youll be all right.
itll make a hitsee if it dont.

iill try it.

wait till i give the word, then get up on all fours, but dont
straighten up till you feel the trunk about you. well make a showman
of you before you know it.

i seem to be the whole show as it is, grumbled phil.

you are, just nowyou and emperor. good thing the other performers are
not in the ring, or they would all be jealous of you.

i wish uncle abner could see me now. wouldnt he be mad! grinned
phil, as the memory of his crabbed relative came back to him. hed
come right out after me with his stick, hed be so angry. but i guess
emperor wouldnt let him touch me, decided the boy proudly, with an
affectionate pat to which the elephant responded with a cough that
sounded not unlike the explosion of a dynamite cartridge.

all ready now. dont be afraid. hold each position till i give you the
word to change it.

ready, announced the lad.

emperor! jupiter!

the twitching of a ponderous ear of each animal told that they had
heard and understood.

rise!

phil had scrambled to all fours.

hold him, emperor!

the great trunk curled up, ran over the boys legs and twined about
them.

up you go, kid!

phil raised himself fearlessly, straightened and stood full upon his
feet. that strong grip on his legs gave him confidence and told him he
had nothing to fear. all he would have to do would be to keep his ears
open for the trainers commands both to himself and the beast, and he
would be all right.

he felt himself going up again.

the sensation was something akin to that which phil had once
experienced when jumping off a haystack. he felt as if his whole body
were being tickled by straws.

the elephants were rising on their hind legs, uttering shrill screams
and mighty coughs, as if enraged over the humiliation that was being
put upon them.

it seemed to phil as if emperor would never stop going up until the
lads head was against the top of the tent. he ventured to look down.

what a distance it was! phil hastily directed his glances upward.

at last the elephant had risen as high as he could go. he was standing
almost straight up and down, and on his head the slender figure of the
boy appeared almost unreal to those off on the seats.

thunders of applause swept over the assemblage. people rose up in their
seats, the younger ones hurling hats high in the air and uttering
catcalls and shrill whistles, until pandemonium reigned under the big
top, as the circus tent proper is called by the showmen.

swing your hat at them!

the trainer had to shout to make himself heard, and as it was phil
caught the words as from afar off.

he took off his soft hat and waved it on high, gazing wonderingly off
over the seats. he could distinguish nothing save a waving, undulating
mass of moving life and color.

it was intoxicating. and phil forrest went suddenly dizzy again.

im losing my head, rebuked the lad. if i dont pull myself together
i shall surely fall off. then they will have something to laugh at
rather than to applaud.

he took himself firmly in hand. but the applause did not abate one
whit.

watch out, were going down, warned the trainer.

right!

the elephant trainers command came out like the crack of a
ringmasters whip.

slowly the great beasts lowered themselves toward the sawdust ring.

stoop over and grab the harness!

phil did so.

sit! let go, emperor!

the trunk was released instantly and phil plumped to the beasts head
once more, amid the wildest applause.

the band swung into another tune, which was the signal for the next act
to be brought on. at the same time the ringmaster blew a shrill blast
on his whistle.

the trainer left the ring with his charges by an exit that he seldom
departed through. but he did so in order to leave phil near the place
where his seats were, first having ascertained where these were
located.

put him down, emperor! down, i say!

emperor reached up an unwilling trunk, grasped phil about the waist and
stood him on the ground. at the trainers command the beast released
his hold of his friend and as the hook was gently pressed against his
side to hurry him, emperor started reluctantly away.

phil, with flushed face, a happy look in his eyes, had turned to run up
the aisle to his seats, when, with a loud trumpeting, emperor wheeled,
and breaking away from his trainer, swept down toward the spot where he
had left phil forrest.

the movement almost threw those in that section into a panic. women
screamed, believing the animal had suddenly gone crazy, while men
sprang to their feet.

phil had turned at the first alarm, and, observing what was taking
place, with rare presence of mind trotted down to the arena again.

he reached there about the same time that emperor did.

with a shrill scream emperor threw his long trunk about the lad, and
before phil had time to catch his breath, he had been hurled to the
elephants back.

uttering loud trumpetings the great elephant started on a swift shamble
for his quarters, giving not the slightest heed to his trainers
commands to halt.




chapter ix.
getting his first call


let him go. emperor wont hurt me, laughed phil as soon as he could
get his breath, for he was moving along at a pace which would have
meant a tumble to the ground had the elephant not supported the lad
with its trunk.

the audience soon seeing that no harm had come to the boy, set up
another roar, which was still loud in phils ears when emperor set his
burden down after reaching the elephant quarters in the menagerie tent.

youre a bad boy. get down, sir, and let me off, chided phil.

the elephant, to his surprise, cautiously let himself down to his
knees, his trunk at the same time reaching out surreptitiously for a
wisp of fresh grass.

phil slipped off, laughing heartily. he had lost all fear of the great,
hulking beast.

dont punish him, please, begged the boy when the keeper came
hurrying along with jupiter. but if you will make him let me alone,
ill go in the other tent. i want to see the circus.

wait a moment. ill chain him up.

the keeper soon had emperor fast. then after a final affectionate
petting phil ran lightly to the other tent and quickly made his way to
his seat. the people were so engrossed in the acts in the ring that
they did not observe the boy particularly this time.

did i make a show of myself, mrs. cahill? questioned the lad, with
sparkling eyes.

you did not. you were as handsome as a picture. there isnt one of all
those people that looks so handsome or so manly as

please, please, mrs. cahill! begged the lad, blushing violently.
have you seen anything of my friend teddy? i had forgotten all about
him.

that looks like him down there.

where?

there, leaning against that pole, she pointed.

phil gazed in the direction indicated, and there, sure enough, was
teddy tucker leaning carelessly against the center pole. he had no
right to be there, as phil well knew, and he watched with amused
interest for the moment when the other boys presence would be
discovered.

it came shortly afterwards. all at once the ringmaster fixed a cold eye
on teddy.

hey, you!

teddy gave no heed to him.

get out of there! think you own this show?

the lad made believe that he did not hear.

the ringmasters long whip lash curled through the air, going off with
a crack that sounded as if a pistol had been fired, and within an inch
of teddys nose.

teddy sprang back, slapping a hand to his face, believing that he had
been hit. then there followed a series of disconcerting snaps all
around his head as the long lash began to work, but so skillfully was
it wielded that the end of it did not touch him.

but teddy had had enough. he turned and ran for the seats.

come up here, cried phil, laughing immoderately. heres a seat right
beside us and there wont be any ringmaster to bother you.

considerably crestfallen, the lad climbed up to where phil and mrs.
cahill were sitting.

you mustnt go down there, you know, teddy. they dont allow outsiders
in the ring while the performance is going on. someone might get hurt

they let you in, bristled teddy.

that was different. they couldnt help themselves, and neither could
i. emperor took me in whether i would or not; and, in fact, i didnt
know i was going till i was halfway there.

phils companion surveyed him with admiration.

my, but you did cut a figure up on that elephants head! i should have
been afraid.

there was nothing to be afraid of. but lets watch the performance.
theres a trapeze act going on now.

for a few moments the lads watched the graceful bodies of the
performers slipping through the air. one would swing out from his
perch, flying straight into the arms of his fellow-performer who was
hanging head down from another swinging bar. on the return sweep the
first performer would catch his own bar and return to his perch.

looks easy. ill bet i could do that, nodded teddy.

phil shook his head.

not so easy as it looks.

how much do you suppose they getthink they must get as much as a
dollar and a half a day for doing that? id do it for a dollar, if i
could, averred the irrepressible teddy tucker.

they get a good many more dollars than that, teddy. ive heard that
some of them get all of twenty-five or thirty dollars a week.

phils companion whistled.

the next act was a bareback riding exhibition, by a pretty, graceful
young woman whom the ringmaster introduced as mademoiselle mora.

at the crack of the whip she sprang lightly to the back of the gray old
ring horse and began a series of feats that made the boys sit forward
in their seats.

at the conclusion of the act mademoiselle mora ran out to the edge of
the ring, and blowing a kiss at the blushing phil, tripped away on
fairy feet for the dressing tent.

did you see her? she bowed to me? exclaimed teddy enthusiastically.

guess she didnt see you at all, young man, replied mrs. cahill
dryly. theres others in the tent besides you, even if the ringmaster
did crack his whip in your face and just miss your nose.

a clown came out and sang a song about a boy who had rescued a
beautiful young woman from a runaway horse and got kidnaped by an
elephant. the song made a hit, for most of the audience understood that
it referred to phil forrest.

and so the performance went on, with a glitter and a crash, a haze of
yellow dust hanging like a golden cloud in the afternoon sun, over
spectators and performers alike.

hello, theres rod! exclaimed teddy.

who?

rod. the red-haired kid we saw this morning, only his hair is black
now. hes covered up his own looks so he wont set the tent on fire.

oh, you mean rodney palmer? yes, i guess that is he.

see, theyre pulling him up on a rope. i wonder where he is going?

to those flying rings, explained phil. and there is a young woman
going up, too.

one after another was pulled up, until a troupe of four had ascended
and swung off to the rings that were suspended far up there in the
haze.

both phil and teddy were more than ordinarily interested in this act,
for they were no mean performers on the rings themselves. in the
schoolyard an apparatus had been rigged with flying rings, and on this
the boys had practiced untiringly during the spring months, until they
had both become quite proficient.

isnt he great? breathed teddy, as rodney palmer swung out into the
air, letting his legs slip through the rings until only his toes were
hanging to the slender support.

yes; he certainly does do it fine.

we can do it just as well.

perhaps, but not so gracefully.

see, hes swinging his hand at us.

sure enough, rodney had picked out the two lads, and was smiling at
them and waving a hand in their direction. the two lads felt very proud
of this, knowing as they did that they were the envy of every boy of
their acquaintance within sight of them.

the climax of the act was when the young woman seemed to plunge
straight down toward the ground.

the women in the audience uttered sharp little cries of alarm. but the
performer was not falling. strong slender ropes had been fastened to
her heels, the other ends being held by one of the performers who was
hanging from the rings.

as a result the falling girls flight was checked just before she
reached the ground and the spectators breathed a sigh of profound
relief.

my, that was great! i wouldnt want to do that.

no, youre too heavy, teddy. thats why they have a girl do it. she is
slender and light

id be light headed.

guess, i would, too, laughed phil.

at this juncture an attendant came running up the steps, halting before
the lads.

are you phil forrest? he asked.

yes.

the boss wants to see you.

mr. sparling? all right. i wanted to see the rest of the show, but
ill go. phil rose reluctantly and followed the guide. ill meet you
by the ticket wagon if i dont get back here, teddy, he said.




chapter x.
phil gets a surprise


where will i find mr. sparling?

in the doghouse.

wheres that?

out back of the ticket wagon. its a little a tent, and we call it the
bosss doghouse, because its only big enough to hold a couple of st.
bernards.

oh! what does he want of me?

ask him, grinned the attendant, who, it developed, was an usher in
the reserved-seat section. he dont tell us fellows his business. say,
that was a great stunt you did with emperor.

oh, i dont know.

i do. theres the doghouse over there. see it?

yes, thank you.

the attendant leaving him, phil walked on alone to mr. sparlings
private office, for such was the use to which he put the little tent
that the usher had called the doghouse.

i wonder what he can want of me? mused phil. probably he wants to
thank me for stopping that pony. i hope he doesnt. i dont like to be
thanked. and it wasnt much of anything that i did anyway. maybe hes
going tobut whats the use of guessing?

the lad stepped up to the tent, the flaps of which were closed. he
stretched out his hand to knock, then grinned sheepishly.

i forgot you couldnt knock at a tent door. i wonder how visitors
announce themselves, anyway.

his toe, at that moment, chanced to touch the tent pole and that gave
him an idea. phil tapped against the pole with his foot.

come in! bellowed the voice of the owner of the show.

phil entered, hat in hand. at the moment the owner was busily engaged
with a pile of bills for merchandise recently purchased at the local
stores, and he neither looked up nor spoke.

phil stood quietly waiting, noting amusedly the stern scowl that
appeared to be part of mr. sparlings natural expression.

well, what do you want? he demanded, with disconcerting suddenness.

ii was told that you had sent for me, that you wanted to see me,
began the lad, with a show of diffidence.

so i did, so i did.

the showman hitched his camp chair about so he could get a better look
at his visitor. he studied phil from head to foot with his usual scowl.

sit down!

on the ground, sir?

ground? no, of course not. wheres that chair? oh, my lazy tent man
didnt open it. ill fire him the first place we get to where he wont
be likely to starve to death. i hear youve been trying to put my show
out of business.

i wasnt aware of it, sir, replied phil, looking squarely at his
questioner. perhaps i was not wholly blameless in attaching myself to
emperor.

huh! grunted mr. sparling, but whether or not it was a grunt of
disapproval, phil could not determine.

so youre not living at home?

i have no home now, sir.

just so, just so. brought up in refined surroundings, parents dead,
crabbed old uncle turned you out of doors for reasons best known to
himself

phil was amazed.

you seem to know all about me, sir.

of course. its my business to know something about everything. i
ought to thank you for getting mrs. sparling out of that mix-up this
morning, but ill let her do that for herself. she wants to see you
after the performance.

i dont like to be thanked, mr. sparling, though i should like to know
mrs. sparling, said phil boldly.

neither do i, neither do i. emperor has gone daffy over you. what did
you feed him?

some sugar and peanuts. that was all.

huh! you ought to be a showman.

i have always wanted to be, mr. sparling.

oh, you have, eh?

yes, sir.

well, why dont you?

i have never had the opportunity.

you mean youve never looked for an opportunity. there are always
opportunities for everything, but we have to go after them. youve been
going after them today for the first time, and youve nailed one of
them clear up to the splice of the center pole. understand?

not entirely, sir.

well, do you want to join out with the great sparling combined shows,
or dont you?

you meani join thethe

mr. sparling was observing him narrowly.

i said, would you like to join our show?

i should like it better than anything else in the world.

sign this contract, then, snapped the showman, thrusting a paper
toward phil forrest, at the same time dipping a pen in the ink bottle
and handing it to him.

you will allow me to read it first, will you not?

good! thats the way i like to hear a boy talk. shows hes got some
sense besides what hes learned in books at somewell, never mind.

whatwhat is this, ten dollars a week? gasped phil, scarcely able to
believe his eyes as he looked at the paper.

thats what the contract says, doesnt it?

yes, sir.

then, thats what it is. traveling expenses and feed included. you are
an easy keeper?

well, i dont eat quite as much as a horse, if thats what you mean,
laughed phil.

huh!

after reading the contract through, the lad affixed his signature to it
with trembling hand. it was almost too good to be true.

thank you, sir, he said, laying the paper before mr. sparling.

and now, my lad, added the showman more mildly, let me give you some
advice. some folks look upon circus people as rough and intemperate.
that days past. when a man gets bad habits hes of no further use in
the circus business. he closes mighty quick. remember that.

yes, sir. you need not worry about my getting into any such trouble.

i dont, or i wouldnt take you. and another thing: dont get it into
your head, as a good many show people do, that you know more about
running the business than the boss does. he might not agree with you.
its a bad thing to disagree with the boss, eh?

i understand, sir.

youd better.

what do you want me to do? i dont know what i can do to earn that
salary, but i am willing to work at whatever you may put me to

thats the talk. i was waiting for you to come to that. but leave the
matter to me. youll have a lot of things to do, after you get your
bearings and i find out what you can do best. as it is, you have earned
your salary for the first season whether you do anything else or not.
you saved the big cat and you probably saved my wifes life, but well
let that pass. when can you join out?

im ready now, sir. i shall want to go home and get my things and my
books.

huh! thats right. take your time. we shant be pulling out of here
till after midnight, so youd better go home and get ready. youll want
to bid good-bye to mrs. cacacahill.

i wonder if there is anything that he doesnt know about, marveled
phil.

anything you want to ask me aboutany favor youd like? if there is,
get it out.

well, yes, there is, but i scarcely feel like asking it, you have been
so kind to me.

shucks!

ii have a little friend, whowho, like myself, has no parents and is
crazy over the circus. he wants to be a circus man just as much as i
do. if you had a placeif you could find something for him to do, i
should appreciate it very much.

who is he, that youngster with the clown face, who crawled in under
the tent this afternoon?

phil laughed outright.

i presume so. thats the way he usually gets in.

where is he now?

seeing the performance, sir.

nail him when he comes out. well give him all the show he wants.

with profuse thanks phil forrest backed from the tent and walked
rapidly toward the entrance. it seemed to him as if he were walking on
air.

let that boy through. hes with the show now, bellowed mr. sparling,
poking his head from the doghouse tent.

the gateman nodded.

how soon will the performance be over? inquired phil, approaching the
gateman.

ten minutes now.

then, i guess i wont go in. i promised to meet teddy over by the
ticket wagon anyway.

but phil could not stand still. thrusting his hands in his pockets he
began pacing back and forth, pondering deeply. he did not observe the
shrewd eyes of mr. sparling fixed upon him from behind the flap of the
little tent.

at last, at last! mused phil. im a real live showman at last, but
what kind of a showman i dont know. probably theyll make me help put
up the tents and take them down. but, i dont care. ill do anything.
and think of the money ill earn. ten dollars a week! he exclaimed,
pausing and glancing up at the fluttering flags waving from center and
quarter poles. why, its a fortune! i shall be able to save most all
of it, too. oh, im so happy!

theyre coming out, called the gateman to him.

thank you.

phils face was full of repressed excitement when teddy came slouching
up to him.

bully show, announced the lad. didnt know which way to look, there
was so much to be seen.

how would you like to join the show and be a real circus man?
demanded phil.

great!

maybe i can fix it for you.

you?

yes.

dont give me such a shock, phil. you said it almost as if you meant
it.

and i did.

teddy gazed at his companion for a full minute.

somethings been going on, i guesssomething that i dont seem to know
anything about.

there has, teddy. im already a showman. you come with me. mr.
sparling wants to speak with you. dont be afraid of him. he talks as
if he was mad all the time, but im sure he isnt.

grasping teddy by the arm phil rushed him into mr. sparlings tent,
entering this time without knocking.

this is my friend whom i spoke to you about, announced phil,
thrusting teddy up before the showman.

mr. sparling eyed the lad suspiciously.

want to join out, too, eh?

iid like to, stammered teddy.

do your parents approve of your going with a show?

ii dont know, sir.

youd better find out, then. ask them mighty quick. this is no camp
meeting outfit that plays week stands.

cant.

why not?

cause theyre dead.

huh! why didnt you say so before?

you didnt ask me.

youre too smart, young man.

takes a smart man to be a circus man, doesnt it?

i guess youre right at that, answered the showman, his stern
features relaxing into a smile. youll do. but youd better not hand
out that line of sharp talk in bunches when you get with the show. it
might get you into trouble if you did.

yes, sir; ill be good.

now, you boys had better run along and make your preparations. you may
take your supper in the cook tent tonight if you wish. but you will
have to be on hand promptly, as they take down the cook tent first of
all.

thank you; we will, answered phil.

what actwhat do i perform? questioned teddy, swelling with pride.

perform?

yes.

ho, ho, ho!

im going to be a performer and wear pink pants, aint i?

a performer? oh, thats too good. yes, my son, you shall be a
performer. how would you like to be a juggler?

fine!

then, i think ill let you juggle the big coffeepot in the cook tent
for the edification of the hungry roustabouts, grinned mr. sparling.

what do i do?

do, young mando?

yes, sir.

why, you stand by the coffee boiler in the cook tent, and when you
hear a waiter bawl draw one, at the same time throwing a pitcher at
you from halfway across the tent, you catch the pitcher and have it
filled and ready for him by the time he gets to you.

do i throw the pitcherful of coffee back at him? questioned teddy
innocently.

you might, but you wouldnt be apt to try it a second time. youd be
likely to get a resounding slap from the flat of his hand

id hit him on the nose if he did, declared teddy belligerently.

mr. sparling could not resist laughing.

thats not the way to begin. but you will learn. follow your friend
phil, here, and you will be all right if i am any judge of boys. i
ought to be, for i have boys of my own. youd better be going now.

the two lads started off at a brisk pace. phil to tell mrs. cahill of
his good fortune. teddy to bid good-bye to the people with whom he had
been living as chore boy.




chapter xi.
the first night with the show


teddy, you and i are a pair of lucky boys. do you know it? asked
phil.

each, with his bag of belongings, was on his way to the circus lot, the
boys having bid good-bye to their friends in the village.

the people with whom teddy lived had given a reluctant consent to his
going with the circus, after he had explained that phil forrest had
gotten him the place and that phil himself was going to join the show.
the lad told them he was going to make a lot of money and that someday
he would pay them for all they had done for him. and he kept his word
faithfully.

maybe. i reckon barnum & bailey will be wanting us first thing we
know, answered teddy.

we shall be lucky if we hold on to the job we have already. did mr.
sparling say what he would pay you?

no, he didnt think of thatat least i didnt. did he tell you how
much you were going to get?

phil nodded.

how much?

i dont think i had better say, answered the lad doubtfully. if you
ask him and he tells you, of course that will be all right. i shall be
glad to do so then. it isnt that i dont want you to know, you
understand, but it might be better business, just now, to say nothing
about it, added phil, with a wisdom far beyond his years.

dark secret, eh? jeered teddy tucker.

no; theres no secret about it. it is just plain business, thats
all.

business! huh! who ever heard of a circus being business?

youll find business enough when you get in, teddy tucker.

dont believe it. its just good fun and thats all.

they had reached the circus lot by this time and were now making their
way to mr. sparlings tent.

we have come to report, sir, announced phil, entering the tent with
teddy close behind him. we are ready for work.

there was a proud ring in phil forrests voice as he made the
announcement.

very well, boys. hand your baggage over to the man at the baggage
wagon. if there is anything in either of your grips that you will want
during the night you had better get it out, for you will be unable to
get into the wagon after the show is on the road. thats one of the
early wagons to move, too.

i guess there is nothing except our tooth brushes and combs that we
shall need. we have those in our pockets.

better take a couple of towels along as well.

yes, sir; thank you.

the cook tent is open. go over and have your suppers now. wait a
moment, ill go with you. they might not let you in. you see, they
dont know you there yet.

mr. sparling, after closing and locking his trunk, escorted the lads to
the cook tent, where he introduced both to the manager of that
department.

give them seats at the performers table for tonight, he directed.
they will be with the show from now on. mr. forrest here will remain
at that table, but the other, the tucker boy, i shall probably turn
over to you for a coffee boy.

the manager nodded good naturedly, taking quick mental measure of the
two lads.

the boys were directed to their seats, which they took, almost as if in
a dream. it was a new and unfamiliar experience to them. the odor of
the food, the sweet scents from the green grass underneath their feet,
all so familiar to the showman, gave phil and teddy appetites that even
a canvasman might have envied.

the performers glanced at them curiously, some of the former nodding to
phil, having recognized in him the boy who had ridden the elephant into
the arena in the grand entry.

not so much after all, are they? grunted teddy.

they are all human beings like ourselves, i guess, replied phil.

stripped of their gaudy costumes and paint, the performers looked just
like other normal beings. but instead of talking about the show and
their work, they were discussing the news of the day, and it seemed to
the two lads to be more like a large family at supper than a crowd of
circus performers.

rodney palmer nodded good naturedly to them from further up the long
table, but they had no more than time to nod back when a waiter
approached to take their orders. teddy ordered pretty much everything
on the bill, while phil was more modest in his demands.

dont eat everything they have, he warned laughingly.

plenty more where this came from. thats one good thing about a show.

whats that?

if the food gives out they can eat the animals.

better look out that the animals dont make a meal of you.

joining out? asked the man sitting next to phil.

yes, sir.

ring act?

i dont know yet what i am to do. mr. sparling is giving me a chance
to find out what i am good for, if anything, smiled phil.

boss is all right, nodded the circus man. that was a good stunt you
did this afternoon. why dont you work that up?

iill think about it. phil did not know exactly what was meant by
the expression, but it set him to thinking, and out of the suggestion
he was destined to work up something that was really worthwhile, and
that was to give him his first real start in the circus world.

whats that funny-looking fellow over there doing? interrupted teddy.

that man down near the end of the table?

yes.

thats billy thorpe, the armless wonder, the performer informed him.

and he hasnt any hands? wondered the boy.

naturally not, not having any arms. he uses his feet for hands.

whats he doing now?

eating with his feet. he can use them almost as handily as you can
your hands. you should see billy sew, and write and do other things.
why, they say he writes the best foot of anybody in the show.

doesnt he ever get cold feet? questioned teddy humorously.

circus people are not afflicted with that ailment. doesnt go well
with their business.

may i ask what you do? inquired phil.

i am the catcher in the principal trapeze act. you may have seen me
today. i think you were in the big top then.

oh, yes, i saw you this afternoon.

how many people are with the show? asked teddy.

at a rough guess, i should say a hundred and fifty including canvasmen
and other labor help. its a pretty big organization for a road show,
the biggest in the country; but its small, so small it would be lost
if one of the big railroad shows was around.

is that another armless or footless wonder next to billy thorpe?
asked teddy.

its a freak, yes, but with hands and feet. thats the living
skeleton, but if he keeps on eating the way hes been doing lately the
boss will have to change the bills and bill him as the fattest man on
earth.

huh! grunted teddy. he could crawl through a rat hole in a barn door
now. hes thin enough to cut cheese with.

phil gave his companion a vigorous nudge under the table.

youll get into trouble if you are so free in expressing your
opinions, he whispered. dont forget the advice mr. sparling gave
you.

apple or custard pie? broke in the voice of the waiter.

custard, answered phil.

both for mine, added teddy.

he got what he had ordered and without the least question, for the
sparling show believed that the best way to make its people contented
was to feed them.

mr. sparling and his assistants, phil observed, occupied a table by
themselves. after he had finished the owner motioned to him to join
them, and there mrs. sparling made a place for him by her side and
thanked him briefly but warmly for his brave act.

i shall have to keep an eye on you two boys, she smiled. any time i
can help you with advice or otherwise you come right to me. dont you
be backward about doing so, will you?

phil assured her that he would not.

the two lads after some further conversation strolled from the cook
tent.

i think ill go in and see how the animals are getting along, decided
phil, beginning to realize that he was free to go where he would and
without fear of being ordered off.

already people were gathering in front of the entrance for the night
performance. the doors were advertised to open at seven oclock, so
that the spectators might have plenty of time in which to view the
collection of rare and wonderful beasts, gathered from the remote
places of the earth, as the announcer proclaimed from the vantage
point of a dry goods box.

phil bought a bag of peanuts and took them in to his friend emperor,
the beast uttering a shrill cry of joy when he saw phil approaching.

ill try to teach him my whistle, said the boy, puckering his lips
and giving the signal that the boys of his school used in summoning
each other.

think hell remember that, mr. kennedy? he asked of the trainer.

never forget it, will you, emperor?

the elephant coughed.

never forgets anything. knows more than any man in the show now,
because he has lived longer.

how old is he?

close to a hundred.

you dont say? marveled teddy. hope ill be able to squeal as loud
as that when im a hundred. has he got a hole through his trunk?

not that anybody knows of.

come on; i want to see the fellow tame the tiger. i missed that today,
because he didnt do it at the afternoon show.

they found mr. sparling standing in front of the cage. he, too, was
there to watch the performance.

this looks to me like ready money, he observed to phil, nodding his
head toward the people who were crowding into the tent.

mr. forrest, will you ride emperor in again tonight? i think thats
one of the reasons they have come here, said the showman, shrewdly
grasping the least thing that would tend to popularize his show.

certainly, sir. i shall enjoy it very much.

they now turned their attention to the cage where the trainer had begun
with the savage tiger.

bengal is in an ugly temper about something tonight, announced mr.
sparling in a low tone. better be careful, bob, he cautioned, after
having stepped up close to the cage.

ill take care of him, answered the trainer, without taking his eyes
from the beast for the fraction of a second.

phil had heard the dialogue and now drew closer to the cage, stepping
under the rope and joining mr. sparling.

teddy, of course, not to be left behind, crawled under the rope also.

sit down in front, shouted someone. we cant see the animals play.

in a moment the spectators saw a play that was not down on the bills.

bob was swinging the whip over bengals nose, the cruel lash cutting
the tender snout with every blow. but he was not doing it from sheer
cruelty, as many of the spectators who raised their voices in loud
protest imagined.

not understanding wild animals as the trainer did, they did not realize
that this plucky fellow was fighting for his life, even though he used
but a slender rawhide in his effort to do so.

bengal was crowding him. the least mistake on the trainers part now
and the savage tiger would put a quick and terrible end to him.

stand back, everybody! bring the prods! bellowed mr. sparling.

phil understood that something was wrong, though he never would have
guessed it from the calm expression on the trainers face.

not a word did the performer speak, but his hand rained blows on the
nose, while snarl after snarl was spit from between bengals gleaming
teeth.

the trainer was edging slowly toward the door. he knew that nothing
could be done with the beast in its present state of terrible temper.

his only hope was that at a favorable moment, when the attendants came
with their long, iron bars, he might be able to spring from the door at
his back, which he was trying to reach.

phils mind was working like an automatic machine. he saw now what the
trainer was attempting to do, and was seeking for some means of helping
the man. but what could a slender boy hope to do against the power of a
great, savage brute like bengal?

phil concluded there was nothing.

a pistol flashed almost in the face of the two lads. mr. sparling had
started away on a run to fetch the attendants who either had not heard
or failed to heed his call.

what did he do that f-f-for? stammered teddy.

to drive the tiger back. it was a blank cartridge that he fired. i
think the tiger is going to attack him. yes, there he goes! oh, thats
_terrible_!

the trainer had been forced against the bars at the back of the cage by
the animal, whose length was more than the width of the cage itself.

in an unsuspected moment the beast had sprung upon the unfortunate man,
and with one sweep of his powerful paw had laid the man low.

with a growl of savage joy, the brute settled back against the bars of
the cage near which the lads were standing.

women shrieked and men grew pale as they stood helpless to do aught to
avert the impending tragedy.

teddy slipped out from under the rope, his face ashen gray. but phil
stood his ground. he felt that he _must_ do something.

then his opportunity came. the beasts great silken tail popped out
through the bars against which he was backing.

phil forrest, without an instants thought of the danger into which he
was placing himself, sprang forward.

his hands closed over the tail, which he twisted about his right arm in
a flash, at the same time throwing up his feet and bracing them against
a wheel of the wagon.

no sooner had he done so than bengal, uttering a frightful roar,
whirled. the force of the jerk as the brute turned hurled phil forrest
against the bars of the cage with a crash, and bengals sharp-clawed
feet made a vicious sweep for the body of the lad pressed so tightly
against the bars.




chapter xii.
a thrilling rescue


open the door and let the man out! shouted phil, with great presence
of mind. but no one seemed to have the power to move.

one sweep of the powerful claw and one side of the lads clothes was
literally stripped from him, though he had managed to shrink back just
far enough to save himself from the needle like claws of the tiger.

at this moment men came rushing from other parts of the tent. some bore
iron rods, while two or three carried tent poles and sticksanything
that the circus men could lay their hands upon.

mr. sparling was in the lead of the procession that dashed through the
crowd, hurling the people right and left as they ran.

with every spring of the tiger phil was being thrown against the bars
with terrific force, but still he clung to the tail that was wrapped
about his arm, hanging on with desperate courage.

though the lad was getting severe punishment, he was accomplishing just
what he had hoped forto keep bengal busy until help arrived to
liberate the unconscious trainer, who lay huddled against the bars on
the opposite side of the cage.

poke one of the tent poles in to him and let him bite it! roared mr.
sparling. half a dozen of you get around behind the cage and when we
have his attention one of you pull bob out. keep your poles in the
opening when you open the door, so bengal doesnt jump out. everybody
stand back!

the commands of the showman came out like so many explosions of a
pistol. but it had its effect. his men sprang to their work like
machines.

in the meantime mr. sparling himself had grabbed the tail of the beast,
taking a hold higher up than phils.

pull the boy off. hes hanging on like a bull dog. if you had half his
sense youd have put a stop to this mix-up minutes ago.

teddy by this time had gotten in under the ropes again, and, grasping
his companion about the waist, he held on until he had untwisted the
tigers tail from his companions arm and released phil, staggering
back with his burden against the rope.

phils limp body, the moment teddy let go of him, collapsed in a heap.

the circus men were too busy at the moment to notice him. one of the
men had thrust a short tent pole between the bars. bengal was upon it
like an avalanche.

biting, clawing, uttering fierce growls, he tore the hard wood into
shreds, the man at the other end poking at the beast with all his
might.

cautiously the rear door of the cage was opened. two men grasped bob by
the shoulders and hauled him out with a quick pull.

the crowd shouted in approval.

all out! let go! shouted mr. sparling.

it took the strength of two men to pull the tent pole from bengals
grip. the instant he lost the pole the beast whirled and pounced upon
the spot where he had left his victim.

finding that he had lost his prey, the savage beast uttered roar upon
roar, that made every spectator in the tent tremble and draw back,
fearing the animal would break through the bars and attack them.

wheres that boy?

here he is, and i guess hes hurt, answered teddy.

give him to me. ill get him outside where we can get some decent air
into him. is he much hurt?

ii dont know.

the showman grabbed phil, and as a helper lifted the bottom of the
tents side wall, mr. sparling ran to his own small tent with the
unconscious phil.

fetch a pail of water.

teddy ran for the cook tent to get the water. he was amazed to find no
cook tent there. instead, there remained only the open plot of grass,
trampled down, with a litter of papers and refuse scattered about.

by the time he had dashed back to the tent to inquire where he could
find a pail, one of the showmen had brought some water and mr. sparling
was bathing phils face with it.

he had made a hasty examination of the unconscious boys wounds, which
he did not believe were serious.

phil soon came to, and by that time the shows doctor had arrived,
having been in attendance on the wounded animal trainer.

no; hell be sore for a few days, but theres nothing dangerous about
those scratches, i should say. ill dress the wounds and he can go on
about his business, was the surgeons verdict.

ive got to ride emperor in tonight, objected phil.

youll do nothing of the sort. youll get into my wagon and go to bed.
thats what you will do, and right quick, at that.

but, urged the lad, the people will all think i am seriously hurt if
they see no more of me. dont you think it would be a good plan for me
to show myself? they are liable to be uneasy all through the
performance. if i show myself they will settle down and forget all
about it in a few minutes.

mr. sparling turned to his assistant with a significant nod.

i told you that boy was a natural born showman. you cant stop that
kind with a club. can you stand up alone?

yes.

phil scrambled to his feet, steadying himself with a hand on the table.

ill be all right after i walk about a bit. how long before the
elephants go in?

youve got fifteen minutes yet.

then i may go on?

yes, yes, go on. youll never be satisfied if you dont. but i ought
to take you over my knee and give you a sound walloping.

thank you. how is mr.mr.the trainer?

he isnt badly hurt, thanks to your presence of mind, young man,
answered the surgeon.

that makes two people youve saved today, forrest, emphasized mr.
sparling. we will call that a days work. you have earned your meal
ticket. better run back to the dressing tent and ask them to fix up
some clothes for you. ask for mrs. waite, the wardrobe woman. teddy
tucker, you run in and tell mr. kennedy, who has charge of the
elephants, that phil will ride tonight, and to wait until he gets in.

both boys hurried away on their respective missions. all that mrs.
waite had that would come anywhere near fitting phil was a yellow robe
that looked like a night gown. phil grinned as he tucked it under his
arm and hurried back to the menagerie tent. as he passed through the
big top he saw that it was filling up rapidly.

i guess we are going to have a good house tonight, muttered the lad
with a pleased smile. it did not occur to him that he himself was
responsible for a large part of the attendancethat the part he had
played in the exciting incidents of the day had done more to advertise
the great sparling combined shows than any other one factor.

i am all ready, mr. kennedy, announced phil, running to the elephant
quarters. the horns were blowing the signal for the grand entry, so the
lad grasped the head harness, as emperor stooped, and was quickly
hoisted to the position in which he would enter the ring.

when the people saw that it was indeed phil they set up a great shout.
the lad was pale but resolute. as he went through the performance, his
wounds smarted frightfully. at times the pain made him dizzy.

but phil smiled bravely, waving his hands to the cheering people.

after the finish of the act mr. kennedy headed the elephants into the
concourse, the open space between the rings and the seats, making a
complete circuit of the tent, so that all might see phil forrest.

this is a kind of farewell appearance, you know, grinned kennedy. and
so the audience took it.

the lads former companions shouted all manner of things to him.

good-bye, phil!

dont stick your head in the lions mouth.

be careful when you twist the tigers tail. better put some salt on it
before you do.

well look out for uncle abner.

phil was grinning broadly as he rode back into the menagerie tent.
everybody in town now knew that he had joined the circus, which brought
forth a variety of comments. some said it would be the end of the boy,
but phil forrest knew that a boy could behave himself with a circus
just as well as in any other occupation, and so far as his observations
went, the circus people were much better than some folks he knew at
home.

no sooner had they gotten into the menagerie tent than a sudden bustle
and excitement were apparent. confused shouts were heard on all sides.
teams, fully harnessed, were being led into the tent, quarter-poles
were coming down without regard to where they struck, everybody
appearing to have gone suddenly crazy.

theyre striking the tent, nodded mr. kennedy, noting the boys
wonderment. you had better look out for yourself. dont stand in the
way or you may get hurt, he warned.

get the bulls out! called a man, hurrying by.

theyre getting, answered kennedy.

what do they mean by that?

in circus parlance, the bulls are the elephants. where you going to
ride tonight?

i dont know. hello, theres my friend teddy. i guess i had better
attach myself to him or he may get lost.

as a matter of fact, phil was not sure where he was himself, activities
were following each other with such surprising rapidity.

but the lads stuck to their ground until it was no longer safe to do
so. phil was determined to see all there was to be seen, and what he
saw he remembered. he had no need to be told after that, providing he
understood the meaning of a certain thing at first.

observing that one man was holding to the peak rope, and that it was
rapidly getting the best of him, both lads sprang to his assistance.

thats right, boys. thats the way to do it. always be ready to take
advantage of every opening. youll learn faster that way, and youll
both be full-fledged showmen before you know it.

o mr. sparling, exclaimed phil, after others had relieved them on the
rope.

yes? what is it?

i have been wanting to see you, to ask what you wish us to do
tonightwhere we are to travel?

you may sleep in my wagon. ill take a horse for tonight.

i could not think of doing such a thing. no, mr. sparling, if i am to
be a circus man, i want to do just as the rest of them do. where do the
other performers sleep?

wherever they can find places. some few of the higher paid ones have
berths in wagons. others sleep in the band wagon. the rest, i guess,
dont sleep at all, except after we get into a town. the menagerie
outfit will be leaving town very soon now. you may go through with them
if you wish.

if you do not object, i think i should prefer to remain until the rest
of the show goes out.

suit yourself.

mr. sparling understood how the lads felt, and perhaps it would be
better to let them break in at once, he reasoned. they would become
seasoned much sooner.

the tent was taken down and packed away in the wagons in an almost
incredibly short time.

come on; lets go into the circus tent and see whats going on there,
suggested teddy.

phil agreed, and the lads strolled in. they found the performance
nearly over. when it was finished quite a large number remained to see
the grand concert that followed.

while this was going on there was a crash and a clatter as the men
ripped up and loaded the seats, piling them into waiting wagons that
had been driven into the tent from the rear so as not to be in the way
of the people going out.

its more fun to watch the men work than it is to see the concert.
that concerts a bum show, averred teddy, thrusting his hands in his
pockets and turning his back on the grand concert.

i agree with you, laughed phil. theres nothing but the freaks
there, and well see them, after this, every time we go for our meals.

have you been in the dressing tent yet? asked teddy.

no, i havent had time. well have to look in there tomorrow, though i
dont think they care about having people visit them unless they belong
there. just now we dont. do you start work in the cook tent tomorrow?

yes. i am to be the champion coffee drawer. i expect they will have my
picture on the billboards after a little. wouldnt i look funny with a
pitcher of hot, steaming coffee in my hand leaping over a table in the
cook tent? and teddy laughed heartily at the thought. ill bet id
make a hit.

you mean you would get hit.

well, maybe.

the boys hung about until the big top had disappeared from the lot. the
tent poles and boxes of properties were being loaded on the wagons,
while out on the field, the ring horses, performing ponies and the like
stood sleeping, waiting for the moment when they should be aroused for
the start.

come on, teddy; lets you and i go make up our beds.

where are they?

well have to ask the porter, laughed phil, who had traveled a little
with his parents years before.

its a shame that that old tiger has to have a cage all to himself. we
could make up a fine bed if we had half of his cage and some blankets,
complained teddy.

thank you. i should prefer to walk. i have had all the argument i want
with that beast. lets go try the band wagon.

all right; that would be fine to sleep way up there.

laughing and chattering, the lads hunted about on the lot until they
found the great glittering band wagon. being now covered with canvas to
protect it from the weather, they had difficulty in making it out, but
finally they discovered it, off near the road that ran by the grounds.
four horses were hitched to it, while the driver lay asleep on the high
seat.

where will we get in?

i dont know, teddy; we will climb up and find out.

getting on the rear wheel they pulled themselves up, and finding the
canvas covering loose, threw it open. teddy plumped in feet first.

immediately there followed such a howling, such a snarling and torrent
of invective that, startled as he was, phil lost his balance on the
wheel and fell off.

no sooner had he struck the ground than a dark figure came shooting
from above, landing on him and nearly knocking all the breath out of
his body.

phil threw off the burden, which upon investigation proved to be teddy
tucker.

whawhat happened? stammered phil. sounds as if we had gotten into a
wild animal cage.

ii walked on somebodys face and he threw me out, answered teddy
ruefully. phil leaned against the wagon wheel and laughed until his
throat ached.

get out of here! what do you mean? bellowed an angry voice over their
heads. think my face is a tight rope to be walked on by every rube
that comes along?

comecome on away, teddy. we made a mistake. we got into the wrong
berth.

heres another wagon, phil. theyre just hitching the horses. lets
try this.

all right, its a canvas wagon. go ahead, well try it.

ive tried one wagon. its your turn now, growled teddy.

i guess youre right. if i get thrown out you catch me the same as i
did you, laughed phil.

yes, you _caught_ me, didnt you?

phil climbed up, but with more caution than teddy had exercised in the
case of the band wagon.

anybody living in this bedroom tonight? questioned phil of the
driver.

guess you are. first come first served. pile in. youre the kid that
rode the bull, aint you?

and twisted the tigers tail, added teddy.

all right. probably some others will be along later, but ill see to
it that they dont throw you out.

thank you. come on up, teddy; its all right.

teddy tucker hastily scrambled up into the wagon which proved to be a
canvas wagonan open wagon, over which a canvas cover was stretched in
case of storm only.

wheres the bed clothes? demanded teddy.

i guess the skies will have to be our quilts tonight, answered phil.

the boys succeeded in crawling down between the folds of the canvas,
however, and, snuggling close together, settled down for their first
night on the road with a circus. soon the wagons began to move in
response to a chorus of hoarse shouts. the motion of the canvas wagon
very soon lulled the lads to sleep, as the big wagon show slowly
started away and disappeared in the soft summer night.




chapter xiii.
the dawning of a new day


hi! stop the train! stop the train! howled teddy, as he landed flat
on his back on the hard ground.

here, here! what are you fellows doing? shouted phil, scrambling to
his feet.

i dreamed i was in a train of cars and they ran off the track, said
teddy, struggling to his feet and rubbing his shins gingerly. did you
do that?

you bet. think i can wait for you kids to take your beauty sleep?
dont you suppose this shows got something else to do besides furnish
sleeping accommodations for lazy kids? take hold here, and help us get
this canvas out if you want any breakfast.

take it out yourself, growled teddy, dodging the flat of the
canvasmans hand.

the lads had been hurled from their sleeping place by a rough tentman
in a hurry to get at his work. the chill of the early dawn was in the
air. the boys stood, with shoulders hunched forward, shivering, their
teeth chattering, not knowing where they were and caring still less.
they knew only that they were most uncomfortable. the glamor was gone.
they were face to face with the hardships of the calling they had
chosen, though they did not know that it was only a beginning of those
hardships.

b-r-r-r! shivered teddy.

t-h-h-h-ats what i say, chattered phil.

say, are you kids going to get busy, or do you want me to help you
to?

phil did not object to work, but he did not like the way the canvasman
spoke to them.

i guess youll have to do your own work. come on, teddy; lets take a
run and warm ourselves up.

hand in hand the lads started off across the field. the field was so
dark that they could scarcely distinguish objects about them. here and
there they dodged wagons and teams that stood like silent sentinels in
the uncertain light.

turn a little, teddy. well be lost before we know it, if we dont
watch out

ouch! were lost already!

the ground seemed suddenly to give way beneath them. both lads were
precipitated into a stream of water that stretched across one end of
the circus lot.

shouting and struggling about they finally floundered to the bank,
drenched from head to foot. if they had been shivering before, they
were suffering from violent attacks of ague now.

whew! im freezing to death! cried phil.

i feel like the north pole on christmas morning, added teddy. i wish
i was home, so i could thaw out behind the kitchen stove.

brace up, teddy. this is only the beginning of the fun. we shall have
worse experiences than this, late in the fall, when the weather gets
cool; that is, if they do not get enough of us in the meantime and send
us away.

ii wish they would send us home now.

come now; weve got to run again. we shall surely take our death of
cold, if we stand here much longer.

run? no, thank you. ive had one run.

and you dont want another? is that it?

not i.

dont know as i blame you. well, if you dont want to run, just stand
in one place and jump up and down. whip your hands, and youll see how
soon it will start your blood to circulating, advised phil, who
immediately proceeded to put his own theory into execution. that feel
better?

yes, some, replied teddy, rather doubtfully. but i could be warmer.
i wonder what time the cook tent will be up.

thats an idea. suppose we go over and find out?

yes, but where is it?

i dont know. but we wont find it if we stand here.

they started off again, this time exercising more caution as to where
their feet touched. they had not gone far before they came upon some
men who were driving small stakes in the ground, marking out the spot
where one of the tents was to be pitched.

can you tell us where the cook tent is going up? asked phil politely.

north side of the field, grunted the man, not very good-naturedly.

which way is north?

get a compass, get a compass, was the discourteous answer.

hes a grouch. come along, urged teddy tucker.

a few moments later, attracted by a light that looked like a fire, the
lads hurried toward it.

where will we find the cook tent? questioned phil again.

right here, was the surprising answer.

what time will it be ready?

about seven oclock. whats the matter, hungry?

more cold than hungry, replied phil, his teeth chattering.

got to get used to that. come here. ive got something that will
doctor you up in no time, announced the man in a cheerful voice, so
different from the answers the lads had received to their questions
that morning, that they were suddenly imbued with new courage.

what is it? asked phil.

coffee, my lad. we always make coffee the first thing when we get in,
these chilly mornings. the men work much better after getting something
warm inside them. got a cup?

they had not.

wait, ill get you one, said the accommodating showman.

never had anything tasted so good as did the coffee that morning. it
was excellent coffee, too, and the boys drank two cups apiece.

we mustnt drink any more, warned phil.

why not? wondered teddy.

because we shall be so nervous that we shall not be able to work
today. and, by the way, were i in your place, i should get busy here
and help in the cook tent until you are told to do something else. i
think it will make a good impression on mr. sparling.

teddy consented rather grudgingly.

ill turn in and do something at the same time. what can we do to help
you, sir? that coffee was very good.

might get busy and unpack some dishes from those barrels. be careful
that you dont break any of them.

all right. where shall we put them?

pile them on the ground, all the dishes of the same size together. be
sure to set a lantern by them so nobody falls over them in the dark.

the boys, glad of some task to perform, began their work with a will.
with something to do it was surprising how quickly they forgot their
misfortunes. in a short time they were laughing and joking with the
good-natured cooktent man and making the dishes fairly fly out of the
barrels.

guess ill have to keep you two boys with my outfit, grinned the
showman.

i think mr. sparling said my friend, teddy here, was to work in the
cook tent for the present.

all right, mr. teddy. theres one thing about working in the cook tent
that ought to please you.

whats that?

you can piece between meals all you want to. if you are like most
boys, you ought to have a good healthy appetite all the time, except
when you are sleeping.

thats right. i could eat an elephant steak nowright this minute. how
long before breakfast?

seven oclock, i told you.

what time does mr. sparling get up? inquired phil.

up? ask me what time he goes to bed. i can answer one question as well
as the other. nobody knows. hes always around when you least expect
him. there he is now.

the owner was striding toward the cook tent for his morning cup of
coffee.

good morning, sir, greeted the boys, pausing in their work long
enough to touch their hats, after which they continued unpacking the
dishes.

morning, boys. i see you are up early and getting right at it. thats
right. no showman was ever made out of a sleepy-head. where did you
sleep last night?

in a wagon on a pile of canvas, answered phil.

and they threw us out of bed this morning, teddy informed him, with a
grimace.

mr. sparling laughed heartily.

and we fell in a creek, added teddy.

well, well, you certainly are having your share of experiences.

will you allow me to make a suggestion, mr. sparling? asked phil.

of course. you need not ask that question. what is it?

i think i ought to have some sort of a costume if i am to continue to
ride emperor in the grand entry.

h-m-m-m. what kind do you think you want?

could i wear tights?

mr. sparling was about to laugh, but one glance into the earnest eyes
of phil forrest told him that the boys interest was wholly in wishing
to improve the actnot for the sake of showing himself, alone.

yes, i think perhaps it might not be a bad idea. you go tell mrs.
waite to fix you up with a suit. but i would prefer to have you wear
your own clothes today.

yes, sir. thank you, sir.

ill tell you why. i telegraphed on to my advance man all about you
last night, and what you did yesterday will be spread all over town
here today. it will be a rattling good advertisement. you and the tiger
are my best drawing cards today, smiled mr. sparling.

glad i have proved of some use to you, sir.

use? use?

yes, sir.

dont be a fool! exploded the showman, almost brutally.

phils countenance fell.

dont you understand, yet, that you already have been worth several
thousand dollars to me?

ii

well, dont get a swelled head about it, for

there is no danger of that, sir.

and you dont have to potter around the cook tent working, either.
that is, not unless you want to.

but, i do, mr. sparling. i want to learn everything there is to be
learned about the show business, protested phil.

mr. sparling regarded him quizzically.

youll do, he said, turning away.

as soon as the dressing tent had been erected and the baggage was moved
in, phil hurried to the entrance of the womens dressing tent and
calling for mrs. waite, told her what was wanted.

she measured his figure with her eyes, and nodded understandingly.

think ive got something that will fit you. a young fellow who worked
on the trapeze fell off and broke a leg. he was just about your size,
and i guess his tights will be about right for you. not superstitious,
are you?

phil assured her he was not.

you will be, after you have been in the show business a while. wait,
ill get them.

phils eyes glowed as he saw her returning with a suit of bright red
tights, trunk and shirt to match.

oh, thank you ever so much.

youre welcome. have you a trunk to keep your stuff in?

no; i have only a bag.

ive got a trunk in here thats not in use. if you want to drag it
over to the mens dressing tent youre welcome to it.

phil soon had the trunk, which he hauled across the open paddock to the
place where the men were settling their belongings. he espied mr.
miaco, the head clown.

does it make any difference where i place my trunk, mr. miaco?

it does, my lad. the performers trunks occupy exactly the same
position every day during the show year. ill pick out a place for you,
and every morning when you come in you will find your baggage there.
let me see. i guess well place you up at the end, next to the side
wall of the dressing room. you will be more by yourself there. youll
like that, wont you?

yes, sir.

going in in costume, today?

no, sir. mr. sparling thought i had better wear my own clothes today,
for advertising purposes.

miaco nodded understandingly.

then youll want to fix up again. been in the gutter?

i fell into a ditch in the darkness this morning, grinned phil.

youll get used to that. mr. ducro, the ringmaster, carries a lantern
with him so he wont fall in, but none of the rest of us do. we call
him old diogenes because he always has a lantern in his hand. if youll
take off that suit ill put it in shape for you.

undresshere?

sure. youll have to get used to that.

phil retired to the further end of the tent where his trunk had been
placed in the meantime, and there took off his clothes, handing them to
the head clown. mr. miaco tossed the lad a bath robe, for the morning
was still chilly.

after you get broken in you will have to do all this for yourself.
theres nothing like the show business to teach a fellow to depend upon
himself. he soon becomes a jack-of-all-trades. as soon as you can
youll want to get yourself a rubber coat and a pair of rubber boots.
well get some beastly weather by-and-by.

the good-natured clown ran on with much good advice while he was
sponging and pressing phils clothes. when he had finished, the suit
looked as if it had just come from a tailor shop.

phil thanked him warmly.

now, you and i will see about some breakfast.

reaching the cook tent, the first person phil set eyes on was his chum,
teddy tucker. teddy was presiding over the big nickel coffeepot, his
face flushed with importance. he was bossing the grinning waiters, none
of whom found it in his heart to get impatient with the new boy.




chapter xiv.
an unexpected hit


another turn-away, decided a ticket taker, casting his eyes over the
crowds that had gathered for the afternoon performance.

i guess mr. sparling knows his business pretty well, mused phil. he
knows how to catch the crowd. i wonder how many of them have come here
to see me. how they would look and stare if they knew i was the kid
that twisted the tigers tail.

phils color rose.

it was something for a boy who had been a circus performer for less
than two days to have his name heralded ahead of the show as one of the
leading attractions.

but phil forrest had a level head. he did not delude himself with any
extravagant idea of his own importance. he knew that what he had done
was purely the result of accident.

ill do something, someday, that will be worthwhile, he told himself.

phils act that afternoon was fully as successful as it had been on the
previous day back in his home town. besides, he now had more confidence
in himself. he felt that in a very short time he might be able to keep
his feet on the elephants head without the support of emperors trunk.
that would be an achievement.

on this particular afternoon he rode with as much confidence as if he
had been doing it all the season.

youll make a performer, encouraged kennedy. youve got the poise
and everything necessary to make you a good one.

what kind, do you think?

any old kind. do you get dizzy when up in the air?

i dont remember that i have ever been up much further than emperor
hoists me, laughed phil.

for the next two minutes the man and the boy were too busy with their
act to continue their conversation. the audience was enthusiastic, and
they shouted out phil forrests name several times, which made him
smile happily.

what would you advise me to do, mr. kennedy? he asked as the
elephants started to leave the ring, amid the plaudits of the
spectators.

ever try the rings?

yes, but not so high up as those that rod and his partners perform
on.

height doesnt make much difference. get them to let the rings down so
you can reach them, then each day raise them a little higher, if you
find you can work on them.

thank you. perhaps ill try it this afternoon. i am anxious to be a
real performer. anybody could do this. though its easy, i think i
might work up this act of ours to make it rather funny.

it will be observed that phil was rapidly falling into the vernacular
of the showman.

if youve got any ideas well thresh them out. emperor will be
willing. hell say yes to anything you suggest. what is it?

dont you think mr. sparling would object?

not he. wait till i get the bulls chained; then well talk.

after attending to his charges, mr. kennedy and phil stepped behind the
elephants and sat down on a pile of straw against the side walls of the
menagerie tent.

phil confided at length what he had in mind, kennedy nodding from time
to time as phil made points that met with the trainers approval.

boy, youve got a head on you a yard wide. youll make your
everlasting fortune. why, id never even thought of that before.

dont you think i had better speak to mr. sparling?

kennedy reflected for a moment.

perhaps you had better do so. but you neednt tell him what it is.
well give them a surprise. lets go see the property man and the
carpenter. well find out what they can do for us.

slipping out under the canvas, the two hurried back to the property
room, an enclosure where all the costumes were kept, together with the
armor used in the grand entry, and the other trappings employed in the
show, known as properties.

mr. kennedy explained to the property man what was wanted. the latter
called in the carpenter. after consulting for a few minutes, they
decided that they could give the elephant trainer and his assistant
what they sought.

when will you have it ready?

maybe in time for tonights performance, but i cant promise for
sure.

thank you, exclaimed phil, hurrying away to consult with mr.
sparling.

i have been thinking out a plan to work up my part of the elephant
act, announced phil, much to the owners surprise.

you have, eh?

yes, sir.

what is it?

i was in hopes you wouldnt ask me that. i wanted to surprise you.

mr. sparling shook his head doubtfully.

im afraid you havent had experience enough to warrant my trusting so
important a matter to you, answered the showman, knowing how serious a
bungled act might be, and how it would be likely to weaken the whole
show.

phils face showed his disappointment.

mr. kennedy says it will be a fine act. i have seen the property man
and the carpenter, and they both think its great. they are getting my
properties ready now.

so, so? wondered the owner, raising his eyebrows ever so little. you
seem to be making progress, young man. lets see, how long have you
been in the show business? he reflected.

twenty-four hours, answered phil promptly.

mr. sparling grinned.

m-m-m-m. youre certainly getting on fast. who told you you might give
orders to my property man and my carpenter, sir? the proprietor
demanded, somewhat sternly.

i took that upon myself, sir. im sure it would improve the act, even
though i have not had as much experience as i might have. will you let
me try it? demanded the boy boldly.

ill think about it. yes, ill think about it. h-m-m-m! h-m-m-m!

thus encouraged, phil left his employer, going in to watch some of the
other acts.

about that time mr. sparling found it convenient to make a trip back to
the property mans room, where he had quite a long talk with that
functionary. the proprietor came away smiling and nodding.

about an hour later phil sauntered out and passed in front of mr.
sparlings tent, hoping the showman would see him and call him in.

phil was not disappointed. mr. sparling did that very thing.

hows that new act of yours coming along, young man? he demanded.

i have done no more than think it over since talking with you a little
while ago. if the props are ready mr. kennedy and i will have a quiet
rehearsal this afternoon. that is, if we can shoo everybody out of the
tent and you are willing we should try it. how about it, sir?

i must say you are a most persistent young man.

yes, sir.

and what if this act falls down flat? what then?

it mustnt.

but if it does?

then, sir, ill give up the show business and go back to edmeston,
where ill hire out to work on a farm. if i cant do a little thing
like this i guess the farm will be the best place for me.

phil was solemn and he meant every word he said. mr. sparling, however,
unable to maintain his serious expression, laughed heartily.

my boy, you are all right. go ahead and work up your act. you have my
full permission to do that in your own way, acting, of course, under
the approval of mr. kennedy. he knows what would go with his bulls.

thank you, thank you very much, exclaimed phil, impulsively. i hope
you will be pleasantly surprised.

i expect to be.

phil ran as fast as his legs would carry him to convey the good news to
mr. kennedy. active preparations followed, together with several
hurried trips to the property room. the property man was getting along
famously with his part of the plan, and both phil and mr. kennedy
approved of what had been done thus far.

according to programme, after the afternoon show had been finished and
all the performers had gone to the cook tent the rehearsal took place
in the menagerie tent. faithful to his promise, mr. sparling kept away,
but a pair of eyes representing him was peering through a pin-hole in
the canvas stretched across the main opening where the ticket takers
stood when at work.

thats great, kid! great, you bet! shouted mr. kennedy after a
successful trial of their new apparatus.

with light heart, an expansive grin overspreading his countenance, the
lad ran to the cook tent for his supper. he came near missing it as it
was, for the cook was about to close the tent. mr. sparling, who was
standing near the exit, nodded to the chief steward to give phil and
mr. kennedy their suppers.

well, did the rehearsal fall down? he asked, with a quizzical smile
on his face.

it fell down, but not in the way you think, laughed phil happily.

no further questions were asked of him.

that night, when the grand entry opened the show to a packed house, a
shout of laughter from the great assemblage greeted the entrance of old
emperor. emperor was clad in a calico gown of ancient style, with a
market basket tucked in the curl of his trunk. but the most humorous
part of the long-suffering elephants makeup was his head gear.

there, perched jauntily to one side was the most wonderful bonnet that
any of the vast audience ever had gazed upon. it was tied with bright
red ribbons under emperors chops with a collection of vari-colored,
bobbing roses protruding from its top. altogether it was a very
wonderful piece of head gear.

the further the act proceeded the more the humor of emperors makeup
appeared to impress the audience. they laughed and laughed until the
tears ran down their cheeks, while the elephant himself, appearing to
share in the humor of the hour, never before had indulged in so many
funny antics.

mr. kennedy, familiar with side-splitting exhibitions, forgot himself
so far as actually to laugh out loud.

but where was phil forrest? thus far everybody had been too much
interested in the old lady with the trunk and the market basket to give
a thought to the missing boy, though some of the performers found
themselves wondering if he had closed with the show already.

those of the performers not otherwise engaged at the moment were
assembled inside the big top at one side of the bandstand, fairly
holding their sides with laughter over old emperors exhibition.

standing back in the shadow of the seats, where the rays from the
gasoline lamps did not reach, stood mr. sparling, a pleased smile on
his face, his eyes twinkling with merriment. it was a good act that
could draw from james sparling these signs of approval.

the act was nearing its close.

the audience thought they had seen the best of it. but there was still
a surprise to comea surprise that they did not even dream of.

the time was at hand for the elephants to rear in a grand finale. an
attendant quietly led jupiter from the ring and to his quarters,
emperor making a circuit of the sawdust arena to cover the going of the
other elephant and that there might be no cessation of action in the
exhibition.

emperor and his trainer finally halted, standing facing the reserved
seats, as motionless as statues.

the audience sat silent and expectant. they felt that something still
was before them, but what they had not the least idea, of course.

up, emperor! commanded mr. kennedy in a quiet voice. all ready,
phil.

the elephant reared slowly on its hind legs, going higher and higher,
as it did in its regular performance.

as he went up, the bonnet on emperors head was seen to take on sudden
life. the old calico gown fell away from the huge beast at the same
time, leaving him clothed in a brilliant blanket of white and gold.

but a long drawn a-h-h-h, rippled over the packed seats as the old
elephants bonnet suddenly collapsed.

out of the ruins rose a slender, supple figure, topping the pyramid of
elephant flesh in a graceful poise. the figure, clad in red silk
tights, appeared to be that of a beautiful girl.

the audience broke out into a thunder of approval, their feet drumming
on the board seats sounding not unlike the rattle of musketry.

the girls hand was passed around to the back of her waist, where it
lingered for an instant, then both hands were thrown forward just as a
diver does before taking the plunge.

ready?

yes.

fly!

the young girl floated out and off from the elephants back, landing
gently on her feet just outside the sawdust ring.

emperor, at this juncture, threw himself forward on his forelegs,
stretched out his trunk, encircling the performers waist and lifting
her clear off the ground.

at that moment the supposed young woman stripped her blonde wig from
her head, revealing the fact that the supposed girl was no girl at all.
it was a boy, and that boy was phil forrest.

emperor, holding his young friend at full length ahead of him, started
rapidly for his quarters, phil lying half on his side, appearing to be
floating on the air, save for the black trunk that held him securely in
its grip.

at this the audience fairly howled in its surprise and delight, but
phil never varied his pose by a hairs breadth until emperor finally
set him down, flushed and triumphant, in the menagerie tent.

at that moment phil became conscious of a figure running toward him.

he discovered at once that it was mr. sparling.

grasping both the lads hands, the showman wrung them until it seemed
to phil as if his arms would be wrenched from their sockets.

great, great, great! cried the owner of the show.

did you like it? questioned the blushing phil.

like it? like it? boy, its the greatest act i ever saw. its a
winner. come back with me.

what, into the ring?

yes.

but what shall i do?

you dont have to do anything. youve done it already. show yourself,
thats all. hurry! dont you hear them howling like a band of comanche
indians?

y-yes.

they want you.

by this time mr. sparling was fairly dragging phil along with him. as
they entered the big top the cheering broke out afresh.

phil was more disturbed than ever before in his life. it seemed as
though his legs would collapse under him.

buck up! buck up! snapped the showman. you are not going to get an
attack of stage fright at this late hour, are you?

that was exactly what was the matter with phil forrest. he was nearly
scared out of his wits, but he did not realize the nature of his
affliction.

bow and kiss your hand to them, admonished the showman.

phil did so, but his face refused to smile. he couldnt have smiled at
that moment to save his life.

all at once he wrenched himself loose from mr. sparlings grip, and ran
full speed for the dressing tent. he had not gone more than a dozen
feet before he tripped over a rope, landing on head and shoulders. but
phil was up like a rubber man and off again as if every animal in the
menagerie was pursuing him.

the spectators catching the meaning of his flight, stood up in their
seats and howled lustily.

phil forrest had made a hit that comes to few men in the sawdust arena.




chapter xv.
a stroke of good fortune


that was a knockout, kid, nodded mr. miaco, with emphasis. im
laughing on the inside of me yet. i dont dare let my face laugh, for
fear the wrinkles will break through my makeup.

thank you, smiled phil, tugging at his silk tights, that fitted so
closely as to cause him considerable trouble in stripping them off.

youll have the whole show jealous of you if you dont watch out. but
dont get a swelled head

not unless i fall off and bump it, laughed phil. where do i wash?

you always want to get a pail of water before you undress.

say, phil, did you really fly? queried teddy, who was standing by
eyeing his companion admiringly.

sure. didnt you see me?

i did and i didnt. will you show me how to fly like that?

course i will. you come in under the big top tomorrow after the show
and ill give you a lesson.

teddy had not happened to observe the simple mechanical arrangement
that had permitted the young circus performer to carry out his flying
act.

i reckon you ought to get a dollar a day for that stunt, decided
teddy.

yes, i think so myself, grinned phil.

teddy now turned his attention to mr. miaco, who, made up for his clown
act in the ring, presented a most grotesque appearance.

how do i look? asked the clown, noting the lads observant gaze.

you look as if youd stuck your head in a flour barrel, grunted
teddy.

ho ho, laughed the clown. ill have to try that on the audience.
thats a good joke. to look at you, one wouldnt think it of you,
either.

oh, thats nothing. i can say funnier things than that when i want to.
why

but their conversation was cut short by the band striking up the tune
to which mr. miaco always entered the ring.

listen to me, kid. youll hear them laugh when i tell em the story,
he called back. and they did. the audience roared when the funny man
told them what his young friend had said.

his work for the day having been finished, phil bethought himself of
his trunk, which had not yet been packed. his costume was suspended
from a line in the dressing tent where many other costumes were hanging
to air and dry after the strenuous labors of their owners.

phil took his slender belongings down, shook them out well and laid
them in the trunk that mrs. waite had given him. it was too late for
phil to get his bag from the baggage wagon, so with a grin he locked
his tights and his wig in the trunk.

guess they wont break their backs lifting that outfit, he mused.

phil then strolled in to watch the show. he found many new points of
interest and much that was instructive, as he studied each act
attentively and with the keenness of one who had been in the show
business all his life.

someday ill have a show like this myself, nodded the boy. he did not
know that he expressed his thoughts aloud until he noticed that the
people sitting nearest to him were regarding him with amused smiles.

phil quickly repressed his audible comments.

the show was soon over; then came the noise and the confusion of the
breaking up. the illusion was gonethe glamor was a thing of the past.
the lad strolled about slowly in search of his companion, whom he
eventually found in the dressing tent.

teddy, isnt it about time you and i went to bed? he asked.

oh, i dont know. circus people sleep when there isnt anything else
to do. where we going to sleep?

same place, i presume, if no one gets ahead of us.

theyd better not. ill throw them out if they do.

phil laughed good-naturedly.

if i remember correctly, somebody was thrown out last night and this
morning, but it didnt happen to be the other fellow. im hungry; wish
i had something to eat.

so am i, agreed teddy.

you boys should get a sandwich or so and keep the stuff in your trunk
while we are playing these country towns. when we get into the cities,
where they have restaurants, you can get a lunch downtown after you
have finished your act and then be back in time to go out with the
wagons, mr. miaco informed them. youll pick up these little tricks
as we go along, and it wont be long before you are full-fledged
showmen. you are pretty near that point already.

the lads strolled out on the lot and began hunting for their wagon.
they found nothing that looked like it for sometime and had about
concluded that the canvas wagon had gone, when they chanced to come
across the driver of the previous night, who directed them to where
they would find it.

the wagon isnt loaded yet. youll have to wait half an hour or so,
he said.

they thanked him and went on in the direction indicated, where they
soon found that which they were in search of.

i think we had better wait here until it is loaded, advised phil,
throwing himself down on the ground.

this having to hunt around over a ten-acre lot for your bedroom every
night isnt as much fun as you would think, is it? grinned teddy.

might be worse. i have an idea we havent begun to experience the real
hardships of the circus life. and indeed they had not.

soon after that the wagon was loaded, and, bidding the driver a cheery
good night, the circus boys tumbled in and crawled under the canvas.

they were awakened sometime before daylight by a sudden heavy downpour
of rain. the boys were soaked to the skin, the water having run in
under the canvas until they were lying in a puddle of water.

there was thunder and lightning. phil scrambled out first and glanced
up at the driver, who, clothed in oilskins, was huddled on his seat
fast asleep. he did not seem to be aware that there was anything
unusual about the weather.

i wish i was home, growled teddy.

well, i dont. bad as it is, its better than some other things that i
know of. ill tell you what ill doill get rubber coats for us both
when we get in in the morning.

got the money?

thats so. i had forgotten that, laughed phil. i never thought that
i should need money to buy a coat with. well have to wait until
payday. i wonder when that is?

ask mr. sparling.

no; i would rather not.

all right; get wet then.

i am. i couldnt be any more so were i to jump in the mill pond at
home, laughed phil.

home! it seemed a long way off to these two friendless, or at least
homeless, boys, though the little village of edmeston was less than
thirty miles away.

the show did not get in to the next town until sometime after daylight,
owing to the heavy condition of the roads. the cook tent was up when
they arrived and the lads lost no time in scrambling from the wagon.
they did not have to be thrown out this morning.

come on, shouted phil, making a run for the protection of the cook
tent, for the rain was coming down in sheets.

teddy was not far behind.

im the coffee boy. wheres the coffee? he shouted.

have it in a few minutes, answered the attendant who had been so kind
to them the previous morning. here, you boys, get over by the steam
boiler there and dry out your clothes, he added, noting that their
teeth were chattering.

wish somebody would pour a pail of water over me, shivered teddy.

water? what for?

to wash the rain off. im soaked, he answered humorously.

they huddled around the steam boiler, the warmth from which they found
very comforting in their bedraggled condition.

im steaming like an engine, laughed phil, taking off his coat and
holding it near the boiler.

yes; ive got enough of it in my clothes to run a sawmill, agreed
teddy. how about that coffee?

here it is.

after helping themselves they felt much better. phil, after a time,
walked to the entrance of the cook tent and looked out. the same bustle
and excitement as on the previous two days was noticeable everywhere,
and the men worked as if utterly oblivious of the fact that the rain
was falling in torrents.

do we parade today? called phil, observing mr. sparling hurrying past
wrapped in oilskins and slouch hat.

this show gives a parade and two performances a day, rain, shine, snow
or earthquake, was the emphatic answer. come over to my tent in half
an hour. i have something to say to you.

phil ran across to mr. sparlings tent at the expiration of half an
hour, but he was ahead of time evidently, for the showman was not
there. nice dry straw had been piled on the ground in the little tent
to take up the moisture, giving it a cosy, comfortable look inside.

this wouldnt be a half bad place to sleep, decided phil, looking
about him. i dont suppose we ever play the same town two nights in
succession. i must find out.

mr. sparling bustled in at this point, stripping off his wet oilskins
and hanging them on a hook on the tent pole at the further end.

whered you sleep?

in wagon no. 10.

get wet?

very.

humph!

we dried out in the cook tent when we got in. it might have been
worse.

easily satisfied, arent you?

i dont know about that. i expect to meet with some disagreeable
experiences.

you wont be disappointed. youll get all thats coming to you. itll
make a man of you if you stand it.

and if i dont? questioned phil forrest, with a smile.

mr. sparling answered by a shrug of the shoulders.

well have to make some different arrangements for you, he added in a
slightly milder tone. cant afford to have you get sick and knock your
act out. its too important. ill fire some lazy, good-for-nothing
performer out of a closed wagon and give you his place.

oh, i should rather not have you do that, sir.

whos running this show? snapped the owner.

phil made no reply.

i am. ill turn out whom i please and when i please. ive been in the
business long enough to know when ive got a good thing. wheres your
rubber coat? he demanded, changing the subject abruptly.

i have none, sir. i shall get an outfit later.

no money, i suppose?

well, no, sir.

humph! why didnt you ask for some?

i did not like to.

youre too modest. if you want a thing go after it. thats my motto.
heres ten dollars. go downtown and get you a coat, and be lively about
it. wait a minute! as phil, uttering profuse thanks, started away to
obey his employers command.

yes, sir.

about that act of yours. did you think it out all yourself?

the idea was mine. of course the property man and mr. kennedy worked
it out for me. i should not have been able to do it alone.

humph! little they did. they wouldnt have thought of it in a thousand
years. performers usually are too well satisfied with themselves to
think theres anything worthwhile except what theyve been doing since
they came out of knickerbockers. howd you get the idea?

i dont knowit just came to me.

then keep on thinking. that act is worth real money to any show. how
much did i say id pay you?

ten dollars a week, sir.

humph! i made a mistake. i wont give you ten.

phil looked solemn.

ill give you twenty. id give you more, but it might spoil you. get
out of here and go buy yourself a coat.




chapter xvi.
his first setback


thathank

out with you!

laughing, his face flushed with pride and satisfaction, phil did move.
not even pausing to note what direction he should go, he hurried on
toward the village, perhaps more by instinct than otherwise. he was too
full of this wonderful thing that had come to himsuccessto take note
of his surroundings.

to phil there was no rain. though he already was drenched to the skin
he did not know it.

all at once he pulled himself up sharply.

phil forrest, you are getting excited, he chided. now, dont you try
to make yourself believe you are the whole show, for you are only a
little corner of it. you are not even a side show. you are a lucky boy,
but you are going to keep your head level and try to earn your money.
twenty dollars a week! why, its wealth! i can see uncle abner shaking
his stick when he hears of it. i must write to mrs. cahill and tell her
the good news. shell be glad, though ill warrant the boys at home
will be jealous when they hear about how i am getting on in the world.

thus talking to himself, phil plodded on in the storm until he reached
the business part of the town. there he found a store and soon had
provided himself with a serviceable rubber coat, a pair of rubber boots
and a soft hat. he put on his purchases, doing up his shoes and
carrying them back under his arm.

the parade started at noon. it was a dismal affairthat is, so far as
the performers were concerned, and the clowns looked much more funny
than they felt.

mr. miaco enlivened the spirits of those on the hayrack by climbing to
the back of one of the horses drawing the clowns wagon, where he sat
with a dolls parasol over his head and a doll in his arms singing a
lullaby.

the people who were massed along the sidewalks of the main street did
not appear to mind the rain at all. they were too much interested in
the free show being given for their benefit.

the show people ate dinner with their feet in the mud that day, the
cook tent having been pitched on a barren strip of ground.

this is where the armless wonder has the best of us today, nodded
teddy, with his usual keen eye for humor.

how is that? questioned mr. miaco.

cause he dont have to put his feet in the mud like the rest of us
do. he keeps them on the table. i wish i could put my feet on the
table.

everybody within hearing laughed heartily.

in the tents there was little to remind one of the dismal weather, save
for the roar of the falling rain on the canvas overhead. straw had been
piled all about on the ground inside the two large tents, and only here
and there were there any muddy spots, though the odor of fresh wet
grass was everywhere.

the afternoon performance went off without a hitch, though the
performers were somewhat more slow than usual, owing to the uncertainty
of the footing for man and beast. phil forrests exhibition was even
more successful than it had been in the last show town. he was obliged
to run back to the ring and show himself after having been carried from
the tent by emperor. this time, however, his stage fright had entirely
left him, never to return. he was now a seasoned showman, after
something less than three days under canvas.

the afternoon show being finished, and supper out of the way, phil and
teddy returned to the big top to practice on the flying rings, which
they had obtained permission to use.

mr. miaco, himself an all around acrobat, was on hand to watch their
work and to offer suggestions. he had taken a keen interest in phil
forrest, seeing in the lad the making of a high-class circus performer.

the rings were let down to within about ten feet of the sawdust ring,
and one at a time the two lads were hoisted by the clown until their
fingers grasped the iron rings.

with several violent movements of their bodies they curled their feet
up, slipping them through the rings, first having grasped the ropes
above the rings.

that was well done. quite professional, nodded the clown. take hold
of this rope and i will swing you. if it makes you dizzy, tell me.

dont worry; it wont, laughed phil.

give me a shove, too, urged teddy.

in a minute.

mr. miaco began swinging phil backwards and forwards, his speed ever
increasing, and as he went higher and higher, phil let himself down,
fastening his hands on the rings that he might assist in the swinging.

now, see if you can get back in the rings with your legs.

thats easy, answered phil, his breath coming sharp and fast, for he
never had taken such a long sweep in the rings before.

the feat was not quite so easy as he had imagined. phil made three
attempts before succeeding. but he mastered it and came up smiling.

good, cried the clown, clapping his hands approvingly.

give me another swing. i want to try something else.

having gained sufficient momentum, the lad, after reaching the point
where the rings would start on their backward flight, permitted his
legs to slip through the rings, catching them with his feet.

he swept back, head and arms hanging down, as skillfully as if he had
been doing that very thing right along.

youll do, emphasized the clown. you will need to put a little more
finish in your work. ill give you a lesson in that next time.

teddy, not to be outdone, went through the same exhibition, though not
quite with the same speed that phil had shown.

it being the hour when the performers always gathered in the big top to
practice and play, many of them stood about watching the boys work.
they nodded their heads approvingly when phil finished and swung
himself to the ground.

teddy, on his part, overrated his ability when it came to hanging by
his feet.

look out! warned half a dozen performers at once.

he had not turned his left foot into the position where it would catch
and hold in the ring. their trained eyes had noted this omission
instantly.

the foot, of course, failed to catch, and teddy uttered a howl when he
found himself falling. his fall, however, was checked by a sharp jolt.
the right foot had caught properly. as he swept past the laughing
performers he was dangling in the air like a huge spider, both hands
and one foot clawing the air in a desperate manner.

there was nothing they could do to liberate him from his uncomfortable
position until the momentum of his swing had lessened sufficiently to
enable them to catch him.

hold your right steady! cautioned miaco. if you twist it youll take
a beauty tumble.

teddy hadnt thought of that before. had miaco known the lad better he
would not have made the mistake of giving that advice.

teddy promptly turned his foot.

he shot from the flying rings as if he had been fired from a cannon.

phil tried to catch him, but stumbled and fell over a rope, while teddy
shot over his head, landing on and diving head first into a pile of
straw that had just been brought in to bed down the tent for the
evening performance.

nothing of teddy save his feet was visible.

they hauled him out by those selfsame feet, and, after disentangling
him from the straws that clung to him, were relieved to find that he
had not been hurt in the least.

i guess we shall have to put a net under you. lucky for you that that
pile of straw happened to get in your way. do you know what would have
happened to you had it not been? demanded mr. miaco.

ii guess id have made a hit, decided teddy wisely.

i guess there is no doubt about that.

the performers roared.

im going to try it again.

no; youve done enough for one day. you wont be able to hold up the
coffeepot tomorrow morning if you do much more.

do you think we will be able to accomplish anything on the flying
rings, mr. miaco? asked phil after they had returned to the dressing
tent.

there is no doubt of it. were i in your place i should take an hours
work on them every day. besides building you up generally, it will make
you surer and better able to handle yourself. then, again, you never
know what minute you may be able to increase your income. people in
this business often profit by others misfortunes, added the clown
significantly.

i would prefer not to profit that way, answered phil.

you would rather do it by your own efforts?

yes.

it all amounts to the same thing. you are liable to be put out any
minute yourself, then somebody else will get your job, if you are a
performer of importance to the show.

you mean if my act is?

thats what i mean.

the old clown and the enthusiastic young showman talked in the dressing
tent until it was time for each to begin making up for the evening
performance.

the dressing tent was the real home of the performers. they knew no
other. it was there that they unpacked their trunksthere that during
their brief stay they pinned up against the canvas walls the pictures
of their loved ones, many of whom were far across the sea. a bit of
ribbon here, a faded flower drawn from the recess of a trunk full of
silk and spangles, told of the tender hearts that were beating beneath
those iron-muscled breasts, and that they were as much human beings as
their brothers in other walks of life.

much of this phil understood in a vague way as he watched them from day
to day. he was beginning to like these big-hearted, big-muscled
fellows, though there were those among them who were not desirable as
friends.

i guess its just the same as it is at home, decided phil. some of
the folks are worthwhile, and others are not.

he had summed it up.

sometime before the evening performance was due to begin phil was made
up and ready for his act. as his exhibition came on at the very
beginning he had to be ready early. then, again, he was obliged to walk
all the way to the menagerie tent to reach his elephant.

throwing a robe over his shoulders and pulling his hat well down over
his eyes, the lad pushed the silken curtains aside and began working
his way toward the front, beating against the human tide that had set
in against him, wet, dripping, but good natured.

going to have a wet night, observed teddy, whom he met at the
entrance to the menagerie tent.

looks that way. but never mind; ill share my rubber coat with you. we
can put it over us and sit up to sleep. that will make a waterproof
tent. perhaps we may be able to find a stake or something to stick up
in the middle of the coat.

but the canvas under us will be soaked, grumbled teddy. well be
wetter than ever.

well gather some straw and tie it up in a tight bundle to put under
us when we get located. there goes the band. i must be off, or youll
hear emperor screaming for me.

hes at it now. hear him?

i couldnt well help hearing that roar, laughed phil, starting off on
a run.

the grand entry was made, phil crouching low in the bonnet on the big
beasts head. it was an uncomfortable position, but he did not mind it
in the least. the only thing that troubled phil was the fear that the
head gear might become disarranged and spoil the effect of his
surprise. there were many in the tent who had seen him make his flight
at the afternoon performance, and had returned with their friends
almost solely to witness the pretty spectacle again.

the time had arrived for emperor to rise for his grand salute to the
audience. mr. kennedy had given phil his cue, the lad had braced
himself to straighten up suddenly. a strap had been attached to the
elephants head harness for phil to take hold of to steady himself by
when he first straightened up. until his position was erect emperor
could not grasp the boys legs with his trunk.

right! came the trainers command.

the circus boy thrust out his elbows, and the bonnet fell away, as he
rose smiling to face the sea of white, expectant faces before him.

while they were applauding he fastened the flying wire to the ring in
his belt. the wire, which was suspended from above, was so small that
it was wholly invisible to the spectators, which heightened the effect
of his flight. so absorbed were the people in watching the slender
figure each time that they failed to observe an attendant hauling on a
rope near the center pole, which was the secret of phils ability to
fly.

throwing his hands out before him the little performer dove gracefully
out into the air.

there was a slight jolt. instantly he knew that something was wrong.
the audience, too, instinctively felt that the act was not ending as it
should.

phil was falling. he was plunging straight toward the ring, head first.
he struck heavily, crumpling up in a little heap, then straightening
out, while half a dozen attendants ran to the lad, hastily picking him
up and hurrying to the dressing tent with the limp, unconscious form.




chapter xvii.
left behind


is he hurt much?

dont know. maybe hes broken his neck.

this brief dialogue ensued between two painted clowns hurrying to their
stations.

in the meantime the band struck up a lively air, the clowns launched
into a merry medley of song and jest and in a few moments the
spectators forgot the scene they had just witnessed, in the noise, the
dash and the color. it would come back to them later like some
long-past dream.

mr. kennedy, with grim, set face, uttered a stern command to emperor,
who for a brief instant had stood irresolute, as if pondering as to
whether he should turn and plunge for the red silk curtains behind
which his little friend had disappeared in the arms of the attendants.

the trainers voice won, and emperor trumpeting loudly, took his way to
his quarters without further protest.

in the dressing tent another scene was being enacted. on two drawn-up
trunks, over which had been thrown a couple of horse blankets, they had
laid the slender, red-clad figure of phil forrest.

the boys pale face appeared even more ashen than it really was under
the flickering glare of the gasoline torches. his head had been propped
up on a saddle, while about him stood a half circle of solemn-faced
performers in various stages of undress and makeup.

is he badly hurt? asked one.

cant say. miaco has gone for the doc. well know pretty soon. that
was a dandy tumble he took.

how did it happen?

wire broke. you cant put no faith on a wire with a kink in it. i
nearly got my light put out, out in st. joe, missouri, by a trick like
that. no more swinging wire for me. guess the kid, if he pulls out of
this, will want to hang on to a rope after this. he will if hes wise.

whats this? whats this? roared mr. sparling, who, having heard of
the accident, came rushing into the tent. whos hurt?

the kid, informed someone.

what kid? cant you fellows talk? oh, its forrest, is it? how did it
happen?

one of the performers who had witnessed the accident related what he
had observed.

huh! grunted the showman, stepping up beside phil and placing a hand
on the boys heart.

huh!

hes alive, isnt he, mr. sparling?

yes. anybody gone for the doctor?

miaco has.

wonder any of you had sense enough to think of that. i congratulate
you. somebody will suffer when i find out who was responsible for
hanging that boys life on a rotten old piece of wire. i presume its
been kicking around this outfit for the last seven years.

here comes the doc, announced a voice.

there was a tense silence in the dressing tent, broken only by the
patter of the rain drops on the canvas roof, while the shows surgeon
was making his examination.

well, well! what about it? demanded mr. sparling impatiently.

the surgeon did not answer at once. his calm, professional demeanor was
not to be disturbed by the blustering but kind- hearted showman, and
the showman, knowing this from past experience, relapsed into silence
until such time as the surgeon should conclude to answer him.

did he fall on his head? he questioned, looking up, at the same time
running his fingers over phils dark-brown hair.

looks that way, doesnt it?

i should say so.

whats the matter with him?

i shall be unable to decide definitely for an hour or so yet, unless
he regains consciousness in the meantime. it may be a fracture of the
skull or a mere concussion.

huh!

mr. sparling would have said more, but for the fact that the calm eyes
of the surgeon were fixed upon him in a level gaze.

any bones broken?

no; i think not. how far did he fall?

fell from emperors head when the bull was up in the air. he must have
taken all of a twenty-foot dive, i should say.

possible? its a great wonder he didnt break his neck. but he is very
well muscled for a boy of his age. i dont suppose they have a hospital
in this town?

of course not. they never have anything in these tank towns. you ought
to know that by this time.

they have a hotel. i know for i took dinner there today. if you will
get a carriage of some sort i think we had better take him there.

leave him, you mean? questioned mr. sparling.

yes; that will be best. we can put him in charge of a local physician
here. he ought to be able to take care of the boy all right.

not by a jug full! roared mr. james sparling. well do nothing of
the sort.

it will not be safe to take him with us, sparling.

did i say it would? did i? of course, he shant be moved, nor will he
be left to one of these know-nothing sawbones. youll stay here with
him yourself, and youll take care of him if you know whats good for
you. id rather lose most any five men in this show than that boy
there.

the surgeon nodded his approval of the sentiment. he, too, had taken
quite a fancy to phil, because of the lads sunny disposition and
natural brightness.

get out the coach some of you fellows. have my driver hook up and
drive back into the paddock here, and be mighty quick about it. here,
doc, is a head of lettuce (roll of money). if you need any more, you
know where to reach us. send me a telegram in the morning and another
tomorrow night. keep me posted and pull that boy out of this scrape or
youll be everlastingly out of a job with the sparling combined shows.
understand?

the surgeon nodded understandingly. he had heard mr. sparling bluster
on other occasions, and it did not make any great impression upon him.

the carriage was quickly at hand. circus people were in the habit of
obeying orders promptly. a quick drive was made to the hotel, where the
circus boy was quickly undressed and put to bed.

all during the night the surgeon worked faithfully over his little
charge, and just as the first streaks of daylight slanted through the
window and across the white counterpane, phil opened his eyes.

for only a moment did they remain open, then closed again.

the surgeon drew a long, deep breath.

not a fracture, he announced aloud. im thankful for that. he drew
the window shades down to shut out the light, as it was all important
that phil should be kept quiet for a time. but the surgeon did not
sleep. he sat keen-eyed by the side of the bed, now and then noting the
pulse of his patient, touching the lads cheeks with light fingers.

after a time the fresh morning air, fragrant with the fields and
flowers, drifted in, and the birds in the trees took up their morning
songs.

i guess the storm must be over, muttered the medical man, rising
softly and peering out from behind the curtain.

the day was dawning bright and beautiful.

my, it feels good to be in bed! said a voice from the opposite side
of the room. where am i?

the surgeon wheeled sharply.

you are to keep very quiet. you had a tumble that shook you up
considerably.

what time is it? demanded phil sharply.

about five oclock in the morning.

i must get up; i must get up.

you will lie perfectly still. the show will get along without you
today, i guess.

you dont mean they have gone on and left me?

of course; they couldnt wait for you.

the boys eyes filled with tears.

i knew it couldnt last. i knew it.

see here, do you want to join the show again?

of course, i do.

well, then, lie still. the more quiet you keep the sooner you will be
able to get out. try to go to sleep. i must go downstairs and send a
message to mr. sparling, for he is very much concerned about you.

then he will take me back? asked phil eagerly.

of course he will.

ill go to sleep, doctor.

phil turned over on his side and a moment later was breathing
naturally.

the doctor tip-toed from the room and hastened down to the hotel office
where he penned the following message:

james sparling,


sparling combined shows,


boyertown.


forrest recovers consciousness. not a fracture. expect him to be all
right in a few days. will stay unless further orders.


irvine.


i think ill go upstairs and get a bit of a nap myself, decided the
surgeon, after having directed the sleepy clerk to see to it that the
message was dispatched to its destination at once.

he found phil sleeping soundly. throwing himself into a chair the
surgeon, used to getting a catnap whenever and wherever possible, was
soon sleeping as soundly as was his young patient.

neither awakened until the day was nearly done.




chapter xviii.
a startling discovery


phils recovery was rapid, though four days passed before he was
permitted to leave his bed. as soon as he was able to get downstairs
and sit out on the front porch of the hotel he found himself an object
of interest as well as curiosity.

the story of his accident had been talked of until it had grown out of
all proportion to the real facts in the case. the boys of the village
hung over the porch rail and eyed him wonderingly and admiringly. it
did not fall to their lot every day to get acquainted with a real
circus boy. they asked him all manner of questions, which the lad
answered gladly, for even though he had suffered a severe accident, he
was not beyond enjoying the admiration of his fellows.

it must be great to be a circus boy, marveled one.

it is until you fall off and crack your head, laughed phil. its not
half so funny then.

after returning to his room that day phil pondered deeply over the
accident. he could not understand it.

nobody seems to know what really did happen, he mused. dr. irvine
says the wire broke. that doesnt seem possible.

off in the little dog tent of the owner of the show, mr. james
sparling, on the day following the accident, was asking himself almost
the same questions.

he sent for mr. kennedy after having disposed of his early morning
business. there was a scowl on the owners face, but it had not been
caused by the telegram which lay on the desk before him, informing him
that phil was not seriously hurt. that was a source of keen
satisfaction to the showman, for he felt that he could not afford to
lose the young circus boy.

teddy was so upset over it, however, that the boss had about made up
his mind to let phils companion go back and join him.

while the showman was thinking the matter over, mr. kennedy appeared at
the opening of the dog tent.

morning, he greeted, which was responded to by a muttered huh! from
james sparling.

come in. what are you standing out there for?

kennedy was so used to this form of salutation that he paid no further
attention to it than to obey the summons.

he entered and stood waiting for his employer to speak.

i want you to tell me exactly what occurred last night, when young
forrest got hurt, kennedy.

i cant tell you any more about it than you heard last night. he had
started to make his dive before i noticed that anything was wrong. he
didnt stop until he landed on his head. they said the wire snapped.

did it?

i guess so, grinned kennedy.

who is responsible for having picked out that wire?

i guess i am.

and you have the face to stand there and tell me so?

i usually tell the truth, dont i?

yes, yes; you do. thats what i like about you.

heard from the kid this morning?

yes; hell be all right in a few days. concussion and general shaking
up; thats all, but its enough. how are the bulls this morning?

emperor is sour. got a regular grouch on.

misses that young rascal phil, i suppose?

yes.

h-m-m-m!

didnt want to come through last night at all.

h-m-m-m. guess wed better fire you and let the boy handle the bulls;
dont you think so?

the trainer grinned and nodded.

kennedy, youve been making your brags that you always tell me the
truth. i am going to ask you a question, and i want you to see if you
can make that boast good.

yes, sir.

perhaps the trainer understood something of what was in his employers
mind, for his lips closed sharply while his jaw took on a belligerent
look.

how did that wire come to break, kennedy?

the question came out with a snap, as if the showman already had made
up his mind as to what the answer should be.

it was cut, sir, answered the trainer promptly.

the lines in mr. sparlings face drew hard and tense. instead of a
violent outburst of temper, which kennedy fully expected, the owner sat
silently contemplating his trainer for a full minute.

who did it?

i couldnt guess.

i didnt ask you to guess. i can guess for myself. i asked who did
it?

i dont know. i havent the least idea who would do a job like that in
this show. i hope the mean hound will take french leave before i get
him spotted, sir.

mr. sparling nodded with emphasis.

i hope so, kennedy. what makes you think the wire was cut?

with great deliberation the trainer drew a small package from his
inside coat pocket, carefully unwrapped it, placing the contents on the
table in front of mr. sparling.

whats thiswhats this?

thats the wire.

but there are two pieces here

yes. i cut off a few feet on each side of where the break occurred.
those are the two.

mr. sparling regarded them critically.

how can you tell that the wire has been cut, except where you cut it
yourself?

it was cut halfway through with a file, as you can see, sir. when
forrest threw his weight on it, of course the wire parted at the
weakened point.

h-m-m-m.

if you will examine it, an inch or two above the cut, you will find
two or three file marks, where the file started to cut, then was moved
down. probably slipped. looks like it. dont you think im right, sir?

mr. sparling nodded reflectively.

there can be no doubt of it. you think it was done between the two
performances yesterday?

oh, yes. that cut wouldnt have held through one performance. it was
cut during the afternoon.

who was in the tent between the shows?

pretty much the whole crowd. but, if you will remember, the day was
dark and stormy. there was a time late in the afternoon, before the
torches were lighted, when the big top was almost in darkness. its my
idea that the job was done then. anybody could have done it without
being discovered. its likely there wasnt anybody in the tent except
himself at the time.

kennedy, i want you to find out who did that. understand?




chapter xix.
teddy distinguishes himself


the boss has an awful grouch on.

yes; i wonder whats the matter with him, pondered the clown.

his brother fun-maker shrugged his shoulders.

guess hes mad because of young forrests accident. just got a good
act started when he had to go and spoil it.

not a hint of the suspicion entertained by the owner and his elephant
trainer had been breathed about the show. nearly a week had passed
since phils narrow escape from death; yet, despite all the efforts of
kennedy or the shrewd observation of his employer, they were no nearer
a solution of the mystery than before. the days passed, and with them
the anger of james sparling increased.

that chum of forrests is a funny fellow, continued the first
speaker. hed make a good clown?

make? hes one already. look at him.

teddy was perched on the back of jumbo, the trick mule of the show, out
in the paddock, where the performers were indulging in various strange
antics for the purpose of limbering themselves up prior to entering the
ring for their acts.

the bright, warm sunlight was streaming down, picking up little flames
from the glistening spangles sprinkled over the costumes of many of the
circus folks.

teddy and jumbo had become fast friendsa strangely assorted pair, and
whenever the opportunity presented itself teddy would mount the ugly
looking mule, riding him about the paddock or the ring when there was
nothing going on under the big top. every time the pair made their
appearance it was the signal for a shout of merriment from the
performers.

teddy had perched himself on jumbos back while the mule was awaiting
his turn to enter the ring, which he did alone, performing his act with
nothing save the crack of the ringmasters whip to guide him.

somebody had jammed a clowns cap on teddys head, while someone else
had hit it a smash with the flat of his hand, until the peak of the cap
lopped over to one side disconsolately.

teddys face wore an appreciative grin, jumbos long ears lying as far
back on his head as they would reach. to the ordinary observer it might
have been supposed that the mule was angry about something. on the
contrary, it was his way of showing his pleasure. when a pan of oats
was thrust before jumbo, or he chanced upon a patch of fresh, tender
grass, the ears expressed the animals satisfaction.

jumbo could do pretty much everything except talk, but occasionally the
stubbornness of his kind took possession of him. at such times the
trick mule was wont to do the most erratic things.

howd you like to ride him in? chuckled miaco, who stood regarding
the lad with a broad smile.

if i had a saddle i wouldnt mind it, grinned teddys funny face as
an accompaniment to his words.

jumbos equipment consisted of a cinch girth and a pair of bridle reins
connected with a headstall. there was no bit, but the effect was to
arch his neck like that of a proud stallion.

youd make the hit of your life if you did, laughed miaco. wonder
the boss dont have you do it.

would if he knew about it, spoke up a performer. the really funny
things dont get into the ring in a circus, unless by accident.

in the meantime the ringmaster was making his loud-voiced announcement
out under the big top.

ladies and gentlemen, he roared, after a loud crack of his
long-lashed whip, to attract the attention of the people to him, we
are now about to introduce the wonderful performing mule jumbo, the
only broncho-bucking, bobtailed mule in the world. you will notice that
he performs without a rider, without human interference. please do not
speak to jumbo while he is going through his act. ladies and gentlemen,
jumbo, the great educated mule, will now make his appearance unaided by
human hand.

the audience applauded the announcement.

at that moment the band struck up the tune by which jumbo always made
his entrance. at the first blare of the brass a fun-loving clown jabbed
jumbo with a pin. the mule did the rest.

here! here! get off that mule! shouted the animals trainer. hes
going on!

let him go! roared clowns and other performers.

jumbo had never made as quick a start in all his circus career as he
did that day. he fairly leaped into the air, though only one man
understood the reason for the mules sudden move.

with a bray that was heard all over the big top jumbo burst through the
red curtains like a tornado. there he paused for one brief instant, as
if uncertain whether to do a certain thing or not.

recalling the ringmasters words, the spectators at first were at a
loss to account for the odd-looking figure that was clinging to the
back of the educated mule.

suddenly they broke out into roars of laughter, while the performers
peering through the red curtain fairly howled with delight.

teddy was hanging to the cinch girth uncertain what to do. the
ringmaster, amazed beyond words, stood gaping at the spectacle, for the
moment powerless to use his usually ready tongue.

jumbo launched into the arena.

get off! thundered the ringmaster, suddenly recovering himself.

i cant! howled teddy, though from present indications it appeared as
if he would dismount without any effort on his own part.

jumbos heels flew into the air, then began a series of lunges, bucking
and terrific kicking such as none among the vast audience ever had
witnessed in or out of a show ring.

one instant teddy would be standing on his head on the mules back, the
next lying on his back with feet toward the animals head. next he
would be dragged along the ground, to be plumped back again at the next
bounce.

no feat seemed too difficult for jumbo to attempt that day.

stop him! stop him! howled the ringmaster.

ring attendants rushed forward to obey his command, but they might as
well have tried to stop a tornado. jumbo eluded them without the least
trouble, but their efforts to keep out of range of his flying hoofs
were not so easy. some of them had narrow escapes from being seriously
injured.

mr. sparling, attracted by the roars of laughter of the audience and
the unusual disturbance, had hurried into the big top, where he stood,
at first in amazement, then with a broad grin overspreading his
countenance.

now jumbo began a race with himself about the arena, following the
concourse, now and then sending his heels into the air right over the
heads of the spectators of the lower row of seats, sending them
scrambling under the seats for protection.

a clown ran out with half a dozen paper covered hoops, which he was
holding in readiness for the next bareback act.

he flaunted them in the face of the runaway mule.

jumbo ducked his head under them and teddy tuckers head went through
the paper with a crash, the mules heels at that instant being high in
the air.

with the rings hung about his neck, teddy cut a more ridiculous figure
than ever. the audience went wild with excitement.

now the ringmaster, angered beyond endurance, began reaching for teddy
with the long lash of his whip. the business end of the lash once
brushed the boys cheek.

it stung him.

ouch! howled teddy as he felt the lash.

stop that! exploded mr. sparling, who, by this time, had gotten into
the ring to take a hand in the performance himself. he grabbed the
irate ringmaster by the collar, giving him a jerk that that functionary
did not forget in a hurry.

jumbo, however, was no respecter of persons. he had taken a short cut
across the ring just as the owner had begun his correction of the
ringmaster. jumbo shook out his heels again. they caught the owners
sombrero and sent it spinning into the air.

mr. sparling, in his excitement, forgot all about the ringmaster.
picking up a tent stake, he hurled it after the educated mule, missing
him by a full rod.

the audience by this time was in a tempest of excitement. at first they
thought it was all a part of the show. but they were soon undeceived,
which made their enjoyment and appreciation all the greater.

jumbo took a final sprint about the arena, teddys legs and free arm
most of the time in the air. he had long since lost his clowns cap,
which jumbo, espying, had kicked off into the audience.

you fool mule! you fool mule! bellowed mr. sparling.

jumbo suddenly decided that he would go back to the paddock. with him,
to decide was to act. taking a fresh burst of speed, he shot straight
at the red curtains. to reach these he was obliged to pass close to the
bandstand, where the band was playing as if the very existence of the
show depended upon them.

teddys grip was relaxing. his arm was so benumbed that he could not
feel that he had any arm on that side at all.

his fingers slowly relaxed their grip on the cinch girth. in a moment
he had bounced back to the educated mules rump. in another instant he
would be plumped to the hard ground with a jolt that would shake him to
his foundations.

but jumbo had other plansmore spectacular plansin mind. he put them
into execution at once. the moment he felt his burden slipping over his
back that active end grew busy again. jumbo humped himself, letting out
a volley of kicks so lightning-like in their swiftness that human eye
could not follow.

teddy had slipped half over the mules rump when the volley began.

catch him! hell be killed! shouted someone.

all at once the figure of teddy tucker shot straight up into the air,
propelled there by the educated mule. the lads body described what
somebody afterwards characterized as graceful somersault in the air,
then began its downward flight.

he landed right in the midst of the band.

crash!

there was a yell of warning, a jingle and clatter of brass, several
chairs went down under the impact, the floor gave way and half the
band, with teddy tucker in the middle of the heap, sank out of sight.




chapter xx.
the return to the sawdust life


is he dead?

no; you cant kill a thick-head like that, snarled the ringmaster.

the audience was still roaring.

with angry imprecations the members of the band who had fallen through
were untangling themselves as rapidly as possible. teddy, in the
meantime, had dragged himself from beneath the heap and slunk out from
under the broken platform. he lost no time in escaping to the paddock,
but the bandmaster, espying him, started after the lad, waving his
baton threateningly.

no sooner had teddy gained the seclusion of the dressing tent than
james sparling burst in.

wheres that boy? wheres that boy?

here he is, grinned a performer, thrusting teddy forward, much
against the lads inclinations.

mr. sparling surveyed him with narrow eyes.

you young rascal! trying to break up my show, are you?

n-nosir.

can you do that again, do you think?

ii dont know.

thats the greatest rube mule act that ever hit a sawdust ring. ill
double your salary if you think you can get away with it every
performance, fairly shouted the owner.

iim willing if the mule is, stammered teddy somewhat doubtfully.

as a result the lad left his job in the cook tent, never to return to
it. after many hard knocks and some heavy falls he succeeded in so
mastering the act that he was able to go through with it without great
risk of serious injury to himself. the educated mule and the boy became
a feature of the sparling combined shows from that moment on, but after
that teddy took good care not to round off his act by a high dive into
the big bass horn.

no one was more delighted at teddy tuckers sudden leap to fame than
was his companion, phil forrest. phil and dr. irvine returned to the
show, one afternoon, about a week after the accident. they had come on
by train.

phil, though somewhat pale after his setback, was clear-eyed, and
declared himself as fit as ever. he insisted upon going on with his act
at the evening performance, but mr. sparling told him to wait until the
day following. in the meantime phil could get his apparatus in working
order.

ill look it over myself this time, announced the showman. i dont
want any more such accidents happening in this show. your friend teddy
nearly put the whole outfit to the badhe and the fool mule.

that afternoon phil had an opportunity to witness for himself the
exhibition of his companion and the fool mule. he laughed until his
sides ached.

o teddy, youll break your neck doing that stunt one of these times,
warned phil, hastening back to the dressing tent after teddy and the
mule had left the ring.

dont you think its worth the risk?

that depends.

for two dollars a day?

is that what you are getting?

yep. im a high-priced performer, insisted teddy, snapping his
trousers pocket significantly. id jump off the big top, twice every
day, for that figure.

what are you going to do with all your money? spend it?

irather thought id buy a bicycle.

phil shook his head.

you couldnt carry it, and, besides, nobody rides bicycles these days.
they ride in automobiles.

then ill buy one of them.

ill tell you what you do, teddy.

lend the money to you, eh?

no; i am earning plenty for myself. but every week, now, i shall send
all my money home to mrs. cahill. i wrote to her about it while i was
sick. she is going to put it in the bank for me at edmeston, with
herself appointed as trustee. thats necessary, you see, because i am
not of age. then no one can take it away from me.

you mean your uncle abner? questioned teddy.

yes. i dont know that he would want to; but im not taking any
chances. now, why not send your money along at the same time? mrs.
cahill will deposit it in the same way, and at the end of the season
think what a lot of money you will have?

regular fortune?

yes, a regular fortune.

whatll i do with all that money?

do what im going to doget an education.

what, and leave the show business? no, siree!

i didnt mean that. you can go to school between seasons. i dont
intend to leave the show business, but im going to know something
besides that.

well, i guess it would be a good idea, reflected teddy.

will you do it?

yes; ill do it, he nodded.

good for you! well own a show of our own, one of these days. you mark
me, teddy, glowed phil.

of our own? marveled teddy, his face wreathing in smiles. say,
wouldnt that be great?

i think so. have you been practicing on the rings since i left?

no.

thats too bad. you and i will begin tomorrow. we ought to be pretty
expert on the flying rings in a few weeks, if i dont get hurt again,
added the boy, a shadow flitting across his face.

then, youd better begin by taking some bends, suggested mr. miaco,
who, approaching, had overheard phils remark.

bends? questioned teddy

what are they? wondered phil. oh, i know. i read about them in the
papers. its an attack that fellows working in a tunnel get when
theyre digging under a river. i dont want anything like that.

no, no, no, replied mr. miaco in a tone of disgust. its no disease
at all.

no?

what i mean by bends is exercises. you have seen the performers do
itbend forward until their hands touch the ground, legs stiff, then
tipping as far backwards as possible. those are bending exercises, and
the best things to do. the performers limber up for their act that way.
if you practice it slowly several times a day you will be surprised to
see what it will do for you. id begin today were i in your place,
phil. youll find yourself a little stiff when you go on in your
elephant act tonight

im not going on tonightnot until tomorrow. mr. sparling doesnt wish
me to.

all right. all the better. exercise! i wouldnt begin on the rings
today either. just take your bends, get steady on your feet and start
in in a regular, systematic way tomorrow, advised the head clown.

thank you, mr. miaco; i shall do so. i am much obliged to you. you are
very kind to us.

because i like you, and because you boys dont pretend to know more
about the circus business than men who have spent their lives in it.

i hope i shall never be like that, laughed phil. i know i shall
always be willing to learn.

and there always is something to learn in the circus life. none of us
knows it all. there are new things coming up every day, added the
clown.

phil left the dressing tent to go around to the menagerie tent for a
talk with mr. kennedy and emperor. entering the tent the lad gave his
whistle signal, whereat emperor trumpeted loudly.

the big elephant greeted his young friend with every evidence of joy
and excitement. phil, of course, had brought emperor a bag of peanuts
as well as several lumps of sugar, and it was with difficulty that the
lad got away from him after finishing his chat with mr. kennedy.

phil was making a round of calls that afternoon, so he decided that he
would next visit mr. sparling, having seen him only a moment, and that
while others were around.

may i come in? he asked.

yes; what do you want?

to thank you for your kindness.

didnt i tell you never to thank me for anything? thundered the
showman.

i beg your pardon, sir; ill take it all back, twinkled phil.

oh, you will, will you, young scapegrace? what did you come here for
anyway? not to palaver about how thankful you are that you got knocked
out, stayed a week in bed and had your salary paid all the time. ill
bet you didnt come for that. want a raise of salary already?

hardly. if youll give me a chance, ill tell you, mr. sparling.

go on. say it quick.

i have been thinking about the fall i got, since ive been laid up.

nothing else to think about, eh?

and the more i think about it, the more it bothers me.

does, eh? grunted mr. sparling, busying himself with his papers.

yes, sir. i dont suppose it would be possible for me to get the
broken wire now, would it? no doubt it was thrown away.

the showman peered up at the boy suspiciously.

what do you want of it?

i thought i should like to examine it.

why?

to see what had been done to it.

oh, you do, eh?

yes, sir.

what do you think happened to that wire? it broke, didnt it?

yes, i guess there is no doubt about it but somebody helped to break
it.

young man, you are too confoundedly smart. mark my words, youll die
young. yes; i have the wire. here it is. look at it. you are right;
something happened to it, and ive been tearing myself to pieces, ever
since, to find out who it was. ive got all my amateur sleuths working
on the case, this very minute, to find out who the scoundrel is who cut
the wire. have you any idea about it? but theres no use in asking you.
i

ive got this, answered phil, tossing a small file on the table in
front of mr. sparling.

what, what, what? a file?

yes, will you see if it fits the notch in the wire there?

the showman did so, holding file and wire up to the light for a better
examination of them.

there can be no doubt of it, answered the amazed showman, fixing
wondering eyes on the young man. where did you get it?

picked it up.

where?

in the dressing tent.

pooh! then it doesnt mean anything, grunted mr. sparling.

if you knew where i picked it up you might think differently.

then where _did_ you get it?

found it in my own trunk.

in your trunk?

phil nodded.

how did it get there?

i had left my trunk open after placing some things in it. when i went
out to watch teddys mule act i was in such a hurry that i forgot all
about the trunk. when i came back, there it lay, near the end

somebody put it there! exploded the showman.

yes.

but who? find that out for melet me know who the man is and youll
hear an explosion in this outfit that will raise the big top right off
the ground.

leave it to me, mr. sparling, ill find him.

the owner laughed harshly.

how?

i think i know who the man is at this very minute, was phil forrests
startling announcement, uttered in a quiet, even tone.

mr. sparling leaped from his chair so suddenly that he overturned the
table in front of him, sending his papers flying all over the place.




chapter xxi.
an elephant in jail


who is he?

i would not care to answer that question just now, mr. sparling,
answered phil calmly. it would not be rightthat is, not until i am
sure about it.

tell me, or get out.

remember, mr. sparling, it is a serious accusation you ask me to make
against a man on proof that you would say was not worth anything. it
may take some time, but before i get through im going either to fasten
the act on someoneon a particular oneor else prove that i am wholly
mistaken.

the showman stormed, but phil was obdurate. he refused to give the
slightest intimation as to whom he suspected.

am i to go, mr. sparling? he asked after the interview had come to an
end.

no! i expect youll own this show yet.

he watched phil walking away from the tent. there was a scowl on the
face of james sparling.

if i thought that young rascal really thought he knew, id take him
across my knee and spank him until he told me. no; hes more of a man
than any two in the whole outfit. id rather lose a horse than have
anything happen to that lad.

days followed each other in quick succession. the show had by this time
swung around into pennsylvania, and was playing a circuit of small
mining towns with exceptionally good attendance. the owner of the show
was in high good humor over the profits the show was earning. the acts
of phil forrest and teddy tucker had proved to be among the best
drawing cards in the circus performance proper. so important did the
owner consider them that the names of the two circus boys were now
prominently displayed in the advertisements, as well as on the
billboards.

during all this time, phil and teddy had worked faithfully on the rings
under the instruction of mr. miaco. on the side they were taking
lessons in tumbling as well. for this purpose what is known as a
mechanic was used to assist them in their schooling. this consisted
of a belt placed about the beginners waist. >from it a rope led up
over a pulley, the other end of the rope being securely held by
someone.

when all was ready the pupil would take a running start, jump into the
air and try to turn. at the same time, the man holding the free end of
the rope would give it a hard pull, thus jerking the boy free of the
ground and preventing his falling on his head.

after a few days of this, both boys had progressed so far that they
were able to work on a mat, made up of several layers of thick carpet,
without the aid of the mechanic. of course their act lacked finish.
their movements were more or less clumsy, but they had mastered the
principle of the somersault in remarkably quick time.

mr. miaco said that in two more weeks they ought to be able to join the
performers in their general tumbling act, which was one of the features
of the show.

there was not an hour of the day that found the two boys idle, now, and
all this activity was viewed by mr. sparling with an approving eye.

but one day there came an interruption that turned the thoughts of the
big show family in another direction.

an accident had happened at the morning parade that promised trouble
for the show. a countryman, who had heard that the hide of an elephant
could not be punctured, was struck by the happy thought of finding out
for himself the truth or falsity of this theory. he had had an argument
with some of his friends, he taking the ground that an elephants hide
was no different from the hide of any other animal. and he promised to
show them that it was not.

all he needed was the opportunity. with his friends he had followed
along with the parade, keeping abreast of the elephants, until finally
the parade was halted by the crossing gates at a railroad.

now was the mans chance to prove the theory false. the crowd closed in
on the parade to get a closer view of the people, and this acted as a
cover for the mans experiment.

taking his penknife out he placed the point of it against the side of
emperor, as it chanced.

now watch me, he said, at the same time giving the knife a quick
shove, intending merely to see if he could prick through the skin. his
experiment succeeded beyond the fellows fondest expectations. the
point of the knife had gone clear through emperors hide.

emperor, ordinarily possessed of a keen sense of humor, coupled with
great good nature, in this instance failed to see the humor of the
proceeding. in fact, he objected promptly and in a most surprising
manner.

like a flash, his trunk curled back. it caught the bold experimenter
about the waist, and the next instant the fellow was dangling in the
air over emperors head, yelling lustily for help. the elephant had
been watching the man, apparently suspecting something, and therefore
was ready for him.

put him down! thundered kennedy.

the elephant obeyed, but in a manner not intended by the trainer when
he gave the command.

with a quick sweep of his trunk, emperor hurled his tormentor from him.
the mans body did not stop until it struck a large plate glass window
in a store front, disappearing into the store amid a terrific crashing
of glass and breaking of woodwork, the man having carried most of the
window with him in his sudden entry into the store.

this was a feature of the parade that had not been advertised on the
bills.

the procession moved on a moment later, with old emperor swinging along
as meekly as if he had not just stirred up a heap of trouble for
himself and his owner.

the man, it was soon learned, had been badly hurt.

but mr. sparling was on the ground almost at once, making an
investigation. he quickly learned what had caused the trouble. and then
he was mad all through. he raved up and down the line threatening to
get out a warrant for the arrest of the man who had stuck a knife into
his elephant.

later in the afternoon matters took a different turn. a lawyer called
on the showman, demanding the payment of ten thousand dollars damages
for the injuries sustained by his client, and which, he said, would in
all probability make the man a cripple for life.

if the showman had been angry before, he was in a towering rage now.

get off this lot! he roared. if you show your face here again ill
set the canvasmen on you! then you wont be able to leave without
help.

the lawyer stood not upon the order of his going, and they saw no more
of him. they had about concluded that they had heard the last of his
demands, until just before the evening performance, when, as the cook
tent was being struck, half a dozen deputy sheriffs suddenly made their
appearance.

they held papers permitting them to levy on anything they could lay
their hands upon and hold it until full damages had been fixed by the
courts.

there was no trifling with the law, at least not then, and mr. sparling
was shrewd enough to see that. however, he stormed and threatened, but
all to no purpose.

the intelligent deputies reasoned that emperor, having been the cause
of all the trouble, would be the proper chattel to levy upon. so they
levied on him.

the next thing was to get emperor to jail. he would not budge an inch
when the officers sought to take him. then a happy thought struck them.
they ordered the trainer to lead the elephant and follow them under
pain of instant arrest if he refused.

there was nothing for it but to obey. protesting loudly, kennedy
started for the village with his great, hulking charge.

phil forrest was as disconsolate as his employer was enraged. the boys
act was spoiled, perhaps indefinitely, which might mean the loss of
part of his salary.

thats country justice, growled the owner. but ill telegraph my
lawyer in the city and have him here by morning. maybe it wont be such
a bad speculation tomorrow, for ill make this town go broke before it
has fully settled the damages ill get out of it. dont be down in the
mouth, forrest. youll have your elephant back, and before many days at
that. go watch the show and forget your troubles.

it will be observed that, under his apparently excitable exterior, mr.
james sparling was a philosopher.

emperors in jail, mourned phil.

the moment mr. kennedy returned, sullen and uncommunicative, phil
sought him out. he found the trainer in mr. sparlings tent.

where did they take him? demanded phil, breaking in on their
conversation.

to jail, answered kennedy grimly. first time i ever heard of such a
thing as an elephants going to jail.

thats the idea. well use that for an advertisement, cried the ever
alert showman, slapping his thighs. emperor, the performing elephant
of the great sparling combined shows, jailed for assault. fine, fine!
howll that look in the newspapers? why, men, it will fill the tent
when we get to the next stand, whether we have the elephant or not.

no; youve got to have the elephant, contended kennedy.

well, perhaps thats so. but ill wire our man ahead, just the same,
and let him use the fact in his press notices.

but how could they get him in the jail? questioned phil.

jail? you see, they couldnt. they wanted to, but the jail wouldnt
fit, or the elephant wouldnt fit the jail, either way you please. when
they discovered that they didnt know what to do with him. somebody
suggested that they might lock him up in the blacksmith shop.

the blacksmith shop? exploded the owner.

i hope they dont try to fit him with shoes, he added, with a grim
smile.

well, maybe it wouldnt be so bad if they did. wed have our elephant
right quick. yes, they tried the blacksmith shop on, and it worked, but
it was a close fit. if emperor had had a bump on his back as big as an
egg he wouldnt have gone in.

and hes there now?

yes. i reckon id better stay here and camp at the hotel, hadnt i,
sos to be handy when your lawyer comes on? emperor might tear up the
town if he got loose.

mr. sparling reflected for a moment.

kennedy, youll go with the show tonight. i dont care if emperor
tears this town up by the roots. if none of us is here, then we shall
not be to blame for what happens. we didnt tell them to lock him up in
the blacksmith shop. you can get back after the lawyer has gotten him
out. that will be time enough.

where is the blacksmith shop? questioned phil.

know where the graveyard is?

yes.

its just the other side of that, said kennedy. church on this side,
blacksmith shop on the other. why?

oh, nothing. i was just wondering, answered phil, glancing up and
finding the eyes of mr. sparling bent keenly upon him.

the lad rose hastily, went out, and climbing up to the seat of a long
pole wagon, sat down to ponder over the situation. he remained there
until a teamster came to hook to the wagon and drive it over to be
loaded. then phil got down, standing about with hands in his pockets.

he was trying to make up his mind about something.

where do we show tomorrow? he asked of an employee.

dobbsville, ohio. well be over the line before daybreak.

oh.

the circus tent was rapidly disappearing now. in another state in the
morning, mused phil.

one by one the wagons began moving from the circus lot.

get aboard the sleeping car, called the driver of the wagon that phil
and teddy usually slept in, as he drove past.

hey, phil! called teddy, suddenly appearing above the top of the box.

hello, teddy!

what are you standing there for?

perhaps im getting the night air, laughed phil. fine, isnt it?

it might be better. but get in; get in. youll be left.

never mind me. i am not going on your wagon tonight. you may have the
bed all to yourself. dont forget to leave your window open, he
jeered.

i have it open already. im going to put the screen in now to keep the
mosquitoes out, retorted teddy, not to be outdone.

has mr. sparling gone yet do you know?

no; he and kennedy are over yonder where the front door was, talking.

all right.

teddys head disappeared. no sooner had it done so than phil forrest
turned and ran swiftly toward the opposite side of the lot. he ran in a
crouching position, as if to avoid being seen.

reaching a fence which separated the road from the field, he threw
himself down in the tall grass there and hid.

in ohio tomorrow. im going to try it, he muttered. it cant be
wrong. they had no business, no right to do it, he decided, his voice
full of indignation.

he heard the wagons rumbling by him on the hard road, the rattle of
wheels accompanied by the shouts of the drivers as they urged their
horses on.

and there phil lay hidden until every wagon had departed, headed for
the border, and the circus lot became a barren, deserted and silent
field.




chapter xxii.
emperor answers the signal


making sure that everybody had left, phil forrest ran swiftly toward
the village. he knew the way, having been downtown during the day.

a light twinkled here and there in a house, where the people, no doubt,
were discussing the exciting events of the day. as phil drew near the
cemetery he heard voices.

it would not do to be discovered, so the lad climbed the fence and
crept along the edge of the open plot. he was nearing the blacksmith
shop and it was soon apparent to him that quite a number of men had
gathered in front of the shop itself.

skulking up to the corner, the last rod being traversed on all fours,
the circus boy flattened himself on the ground to listen, in an effort
to learn if possible what were the plans of the villagers. if they had
any he did not learn them, for their conversation was devoted
principally to discussing what they had done to the sparling show and
what they would do further before they had finished with this business.

phil did learn, however, that the man who had been hurled through the
store window was not fatally injured, as had been thought at first.
someone announced that the doctor had said the man would be about again
in a couple of weeks.

im glad of that, muttered phil. i shouldnt like to think that
emperor had killed anyone. i wonder how he likes it in there.

evidently the elephant was not well pleased, for the lad could hear him
stirring restlessly and tugging at his chains.

wont he be surprised, though? chuckled phil. i shouldnt be
surprised if he made a lot of noise. i hope he doesnt, for i dont
want to stir the town up. i wonder if those fellows are going to stay
there all night?

the loungers showed no inclination to move, so there was nothing for
the boy to do but to lie still and wait.

after a little he began to feel chilled, and began hopping around on
hands and feet to start his blood moving. a little of this warmed him
up considerably. this time he sat down in the fence corner. the night
was moonless, but the stars were quite bright, enabling phil to make
out objects some distance away. he could see quite plainly the men
gathered in front of the blacksmith shop.

after a wait of what seemed hours to phil, one of the watchers stirred
himself.

well, fellows, we might as well go home. the brutes settled down for
the night, i reckon.

what time is it?

half past two, announced the first speaker.

well, well, i should say it was time to go. not going to stay with
him, are you, sheriff?

not necessary. he cant get out.

after listening at the closed door, the one whom phil judged to be an
officer joined his companions and all walked leisurely down the road.

the lad remained in the fence corner for sometime, but he stood up
after they had gone. he did not dare move about much, fearing that
emperor might hear and know him and raise a great tumult.

phil waited all of half an hour; then he climbed the fence and slipped
cautiously to the door of the shop.

it was securely locked.

oh, pshaw! thats too bad, grumbled the lad. how am i going to do
it?

phil ran his fingers lightly over the fastening, which consisted of a
strong hasp and a padlock.

what shall i do? i dare not try to break the lock. i should be
committing a crime if i did. perhaps i am already. no; im not, and i
shall not. ill just speak to emperor, then start off on foot after the
show. it was foolish of me to think i could do anything to help mr.
sparling and the elephant out of his trouble. i ought to be able to
walk to the next stand and get there in time for the last breakfast
call, providing i can find the way.

perhaps phils conscience troubled him a little, though he had done
nothing worse than to follow the dictates of his kind heart in his
desire to be of assistance to his employer and to befriend old emperor.

placing his lips close to the door, phil called softly.

emperor! he said.

the restless swaying and heavy breathing within ceased suddenly.

emperor! repeated the lad, at the same time uttering the low whistle
that the big elephant had come to know so well.

a mighty cough from the interior of the blacksmith shop answered phil
forrests signal.

be quiet, emperor. be quiet! we are going to get you out as soon as we
can, old fellow! you just behave yourself now. do you hear?

emperor emitted another loud cough.

good old emperor. ive got some peanuts for you, but i dont know how
i am going to give them to you. wait a minute. perhaps there is a
window somewhere that i can toss them through.

phil, after looking around, found a window with the small panes of
glass missing. the window was so high that he could not reach it, so he
stood on the ground and tossed the peanuts in, while the big elephant
demonstrated the satisfaction he felt, in a series of sharp intakes of
breath.

now im going, announced phil. goodbye, emperor. heres a lump of
sugar. thats all i have for you.

phil turned away sorrowfully. his purpose had failed. not because he
doubted his ability to carry it out, but he was not sure that he would
be right in doing so.

a few rods down the road he paused, turned and uttered his shrill
signal whistle, with no other idea in mind than to bring some comfort
to the imprisoned beast.

emperor interpreted the signal otherwise, however. he uttered a loud,
shrill trumpet; then things began to happen with a rapidity that fairly
made the circus boys head whirl.

a sudden jingle of metal, a crashing and rending from within the shop,
caused phil to halt sharply after he had once more started on his way.

crash! bang!

emperor had brought his wonderful strength to bear on his flimsily
constructed prison with disastrous results to the latter. first he had
torn the blacksmiths bellows out by the roots and hurled it from him.
next he set to work to smash everything within reach. a moment of this
and the elephant had freed himself from the light chains with which the
keeper had secured him.

whaoh, what is he doing? gasped phil forrest.

the boards on one side of the shop burst out as from a sudden
explosion. down came half a dozen of the light studdings that supported
the roof on that side.

by this time emperor had worked himself into a fine temper. he turned
his attention to the other side of the shop with similar disastrous
results. the interior of the blacksmith shop was a wreck. it could not
have been in much worse condition had it been struck by a cyclone.

all of a sudden the elephant threw his whole weight against the big
sliding door. it burst out with a report like that of a cannon.

emperor came staggering out into the open. there he paused, with
twitching ears and curling trunk, peering into the darkness in search
of phil forrest.

phil recovered from his surprise sufficiently to realize what had
happened and that old emperor was free once more.

the lad uttered a shrill whistle. emperor responded by a piercing
scream. he then whirled, facing up the road in phils direction, though
unable to see the lad.

once more the boy whistled. emperor was off in a twinkling.

steady, steady, emperor! cautioned the lad, as he saw the huge hulk
bearing swiftly down on him. easy, old boy!

but the elephant did not lessen his speed one particle. phil felt sure,
however, that he himself would not be harmed. he knew emperor too well.
with perfect confidence in the great animal, the lad threw both hands
above his head, standing motionless in the center of the street right
in the path of the oncoming beast.

steady, steady, steady! cautioned phil. now up, emperor!

the elephants long, sinuous trunk uncurled, coiled about the lads
waist and the next instant phil felt himself being lifted to the big
beasts head.

ive got him! shouted phil, carried away by the excitement of the
moment. now, go it! emperor! go faster than you ever have since you
chased lions in the jungle.

and emperor did go it! as he tore down the village street he woke the
echoes with his shrill trumpetings, bringing every man and woman in the
little village tumbling from their beds.

the elephant is escaping! cried the people, as they threw up their
windows and gazed out. as they looked they saw a huge, shadowy shape
hurling itself down the street, whereat they hastily withdrew their
heads. in a few moments the men of the village came rushing out, all
running toward the blacksmith shop to learn what had happened there.
there followed a perfect pandemonium of yells when they discovered the
wrecked condition of the place.

in the meantime phil had guided emperor into the road that led to the
show grounds of the previous day. the elephant was about to turn into
the lot, when a sharp slap from his rider caused him to swing back into
the highway on the trail of the wagons that had passed on some hours
before.

once he had fairly started emperor followed the trail, making the turns
and following the twists of the road as unerringly as an indian follows
the trail of his enemy.

hurrah! shouted phil, after they had got clear of the village. ive
won, ive won! but, oh, wont there be a row back there when they find
out what has happened, i wonder if they will follow us.

the thought startled him.

if they do they are liable to arrest me, believing that i let him out.
_go it_, emperor! go faster!

emperor flapped his ears in reply and swung off at an increased gait.
the darkness of early morn was soon succeeded by the graying dawn, and
phil felt a certain sense of relief as he realized that day was
breaking. on they swept, past hamlets, by farm houses, where here and
there men with milkpails in hand paused, startled, to rub their eyes
and gaze upon the strange outfit that was rushing past them at such a
pace.

phil could not repress a chuckle at such times, at thought of the
sensation he was creating.

the hours drew on until seven oclock had arrived, and the sun was high
in the heavens.

i must be getting near the place, decided phil. he knew he was on the
right road, for he could plainly see the trail of the wagons and of the
stock in the dust of the road before him. yes; there is some sort of a
village way off yonder. i wonder if that is it?

a fluttering flag from the top of a far away center-pole, which he
caught sight of a few minutes later, told the boy that it was.

hurrah! shouted phil, waving his hat on high.

at that moment a distant chorus of yells smote his ears. the lad
listened intently. the shout was repeated. holding fast to the
headstall, he glanced back over the road. there, far to his rear, he
discovered a cloud of dust, which a few minutes later resolved itself
into a party of horsemen, riding at top speed.

theyre after me! go faster! go faster! shouted the lad. as he spoke
a rifle cracked somewhere behind him, but as phil heard no bullet the
leaden missile must have fallen far short of the mark.




chapter xxiii.
the mystery solved


as he neared the village phil began to shout and wave his hat. after a
time his shouts attracted the attention of some of the people on the
circus lot, which was on his side of the village.

its emperor coming back! cried someone. theres somebody on him,
added another.

ill bet the days receipts that its that rascally phil forrest,
exclaimed mr. sparling, examining the cloud of dust with shaded eyes.
how in the world did it ever happen? ive been hunting all over the
outfit for that boy this morning. young tucker said he thought phil had
remained behind, and i was afraid something had happened to the boy or
that he had skipped the show. i might have known better. whats that
back of him?

somebody chasing them, boss, a tentman informed him.

and theyre going to catch old emperor sure.

not if i know it, snapped mr. sparling. _hey, rube_! he howled.

canvasmen, roustabouts, performers and everybody within reach of his
voice swarmed out into the open, armed with clubs, stones and anything
they could lay their hands upon.

theres a posse trying to catch phil forrest and old emperor. get a
going! head them off and drive them back!

every man started on a run, some leaping on horses, clearing the circus
lot, riding like so many cowboys. as they approached the lad perched on
the bobbing head of the elephant the showmen set up a chorus of wild
yells, to which phil responded by waving his hat. he tried to stand up
on emperors head, narrowly missing a tumble, which he surely would
have taken had not the elephant given him quick support with the
ever-handy trunk.

theyre shooting at me, cried phil, as he swept by the showmen.

line up! commanded mr. sparling.

his men stretched across the highway, with the mounted ones in front,
his infantry behind. soon the horsemen of the pursuing party came
dashing up and brought their horses to a sudden stop.

what do you want?

we demand the turning over of the elephant which one of your men stole
from us. theyve wrecked the blacksmith shop and therell be a pretty
bill of damages to pay! come now, before we take you back with us.

mr. sparling grinned.

perhaps you dont know that you are in the state of ohio at the
present moment, eh? if youll take my advice youll turn about and get
home as fast as horseflesh will carry you. my lawyer will be in your
town today, and he will arrange for the payment of all just damages. we
decline to be robbed, however. weve got the elephant and were going
to keep him.

and were going to have the boy that broke in and released him.

ho, ho, ho! laughed mr. sparling jovially. i guess youll have the
liveliest scrimmage you ever had in all your lives if you attempt to
lay hands on that boy. come, now, get out of here! if you attempt to
raise the slightest disturbance ill have the bunch of you in the
cooler, and well be the boys to put you there if the town officials
dont act quickly enough.

boys, i guess its up to us, decided the leader of the party.

looks that way.

then what do you say if we stop and see the show?

good idea!

i dont care how many of you go to the show; but, mark me, it will
cost you fifty cents a head, and at the first sign of disturbance
youll see the biggest bunch of trouble headed your way!

its all right, mr. sparling. we admit weve been done.

and that was the end of it. mr. sparlings lawyer visited the town
where the disturbance had occurred on the previous day, and at his
clients direction made a settlement that should have been wholly
satisfactory to the injured parties. ordinarily the showman would not
have settled the case, in view of the fact that neither he nor any of
his employees was directly responsible for the series of disasters. he
did it almost wholly on account of phil forrest, who had asked him to.

well, young man, ive paid the bills, announced mr. sparling that
afternoon before the evening performance.

thank you, glowed phil.

stop that! if theres any thanks in it, theyre coming to you. between
you and the elephant well have another turn-away today. you have
already put a good bit of money in my pocket, and im not forgetting
it. i have made definite arrangements for you and your chum to have a
berth in a closed wagon after this. you will be good enough to offer no
objections this time. what i say goes.

i hope i did not do anything wrong in taking emperor away. im afraid
my conscience has troubled me ever since. but i didnt intend to do
anything wrong or to cause any further damage than already had been
done.

you did perfectly right, forrest. that was a stroke of genius. as for
damage, i tell you i have settled all of that. one of these days you
come in when im not busy and well talk about next season. i want you
to stay with me.

phil left his employer, the lads face flushed and his eyes sparkling.
altogether, he was a very happy boy. the only real cloud that had
darkened his horizon was that anyone should feel such an enmity toward
him as to desire to take his life; or, at least, to cause him so
serious an injury as to put an end to the career that now seemed so
promising.

i know why, of course, mused the lad. it was jealousy. i am more
sure than ever as to the identity of the man who did it. when i get a
good opportunity i am going to face him with it. im not afraid of the
man. as it is, he might try it again; but if he understands that i know
he will not dare try it, fearing i may have told someone else.

having come to this wise conclusion, phil proceeded to the big top,
where he and teddy tucker were to take their afternoon practice on the
flying rings, pausing on the way to pass a handful of peanuts to
emperor, who was again in his place, and give the elephants trainer a
happy nod.

ive noticed of late that signor navaro acts rather grouchy over you
boys working on his apparatus. you want to look out for these
foreigners. some of them are revengeful, cautioned mr. miaco.

signor navaro was the leading performer in the flying-rings act. with
him was his young son, rodney palmer and a young girl performer, whose
father was a clown in the show.

phil shot a sharp glance at mr. miaco, then dropped his eyes.

i guess nobody would be jealous of me, laughed the lad. im only a
beginner, and a clumsy one at that. all i can do is to ride an elephant
and fall off, nearly killing myself.

nevertheless, you take my advice.

i will, thank you.

the boys began their work after putting on their working clothes,
consisting of old silk undershirts and linen trunks. this left them
free for the full play of their muscles, which, by this time, were of
exceptionally fine quality. not big and bunchy, but like thin bands of
pliable steel. both phil and teddy appeared to have grown half a head
taller since they joined out with the circus.

put a little more finish in that cutoff movement, directed their
instructor. the way you do it, teddy, you remind me of a man trying to
kick out a window. there, thats better.

and so it went on. days came and went and the steady practice of the
two circus boys continued, but if mr. sparling knew what they were
doing he made no reference to it. he probably did know, for little went
on in the sparling combined shows that he was not aware of.

nothing out of the routine occurred, until, late in the season, they
pitched their tents in canton, ohio, when something happened that
brought to a climax the certainty of the careers of the circus boys.

all day long the clouds had been threatening. but, though keen eyes
were watching the scudding clouds, no apprehension was felt, as it was
believed to be but a passing thunderstorm that was coming up.

the storm did not break until late in the afternoon when the show was
more than half over. phil had made his grand entry on emperor, and
teddy had nearly sent the spectators into hysterics by his funny antics
on the back of jumbo, the educated mule.

all at once the circus men glanced aloft as the shrill whistle of the
boss canvasman trilled somewhere outside the big top. the audience, if
they heard, gave no heed. they were too much interested in the show.

to the showmen the whistle meant that the emergency gang was being
summoned in haste to stake down emergency ropes to protect the tent
from a windstorm that was coming up.

phil took a quick survey of the upper part of the tent. two acts were
just beginning up there. a trapeze act was on, and the four performers
were swinging out on the flying rings.

both sets of performers were in rather perilous positions were the wind
to blow very hard, as phil well understood. he stepped off until he
found a quarter pole at his back against which he leaned that he might
watch the better the lofty performers.

all at once there was a blast against the big top that sounded as if a
great blow had been delivered. the audience half rose. the tent shook
from end to end.

sit down! bellowed the ringmaster. its only a puff of wind.

before the words were out of his mouth a piercing scream roused the
audience almost to the verge of panic.

phil, whose attention had been drawn to the people for the moment, shot
a swift glance up into the somber haze of the peak of the big top.

something had happened. but what?

theyre falling! he gasped.

the blow had loosened nearly every bit of the aerial apparatus under
the circus tent.

there go the trapeze performers!

down they came, landing with a whack in the net with their apparatus
tumbling after them. but they were out of the net in a twinkling, none
the worse for their accident. almost at the same moment there were
other screams.

there go the rings!

there was no net under the flying ring performers. two of them shot
toward the ground. when they struck, one was on top of the other. the
man at the bottom was signor navaro, his son having fallen prone across
him. the two other performers in the act had grabbed a rope and saved
themselves.

men picked the two fallen performers up hastily and bore them to the
dressing tent, where phil hastened the moment he was sure that all
danger of a panic had passed. the gust of wind had driven the clouds
away and the sun flashed out brilliantly.

a moment later the performance was going on with a rush, the band
playing a lively tune.

phil, when he reached the dressing tent, learned that signor navaro was
seriously hurt, though his son was suffering merely from shock. the
father had sustained several broken bones.

phil approached the injured performer and leaned over him. the man was
conscious.

im sorry, very sorry, sir, breathed the boy sympathetically.

you neednt be. youll get what you want, murmured the circus man.

i dont understand, wondered phil.

youll get my act.

is that what you think i have been working for?

signor navaro nodded.

you are mistaken. of course, if you are not able to perform any more
this season i shall try to get it, but when you are able to go to work
i shall give it up willingly, even if i succeed in getting it during
that time. is that why you played that trick on me? demanded the lad.

you know? questioned signor navaro, with a start.

phil gave a slight nod.

why did you put the file in my trunkthe file you cut the wire with?

i thought i dropped it in my own trunk. somebody surprised me and i
was afraid they would catch me with it in my hand and suspect.

thats what i thought.

you are sharp. and you told no one?

no. but i had made up my mind to tell you. i didnt think it would
have to be this way, though. im sorry it is.

well, i have my punishment. it served me right. i was crazed with
jealousy. ihow is the boy?

not badly hurt, i believe. he will be all right in a few days, and i
hope you will be able to join out in a short time.

signor navaro extended a feeble hand, which phil pressed softly.

forgive me, boy. will you?

yes, whispered phil.

and you will tell no

there is nothing to tell, signor navaro. if there is anything i can do
for you, tell me, and i shall have great happiness in doing it,
breathed the lad.

a final grip of the hands of the boy and the injured performer
followed, after which phil forrest stepped back to make way for the
surgeon, who had hurried to a wagon to fetch his case.




chapter xxiv.
conclusion


you see, an accident always casts a cloud over a show and makes the
performers uncertain, said mr. miaco that night as he and phil were
watching the performance from the end of the band platform.

i should think it would, mused the boy.

soon after that phil went to his wagon and turned in, his mind still on
signor navaro, who had been taken to a hospital, where he was destined
to remain for many weeks.

i guess it doesnt pay, in the long run, to be dishonorable, mused
the lad as he was dropping off to sleep.

the next morning phil was up bright and early, very much refreshed
after a good nights rest between his blankets in the comfortable
sleeping wagon. teddy, however, declared that he didnt like it. he
said he preferred to sleep on a pile of canvas in the open air, even if
he did get wet once in a while.

later in the morning, after mr. sparling had had time to dispose of his
usual rush of morning business, which consisted of hearing reports from
his heads of departments, and giving his orders for the day, phil
sought out his employer in the little dog tent.

im very sorry about the accident, mr. sparling, greeted phil.

yes; it ties up one act. it will be some days before i can get another
team in to take it up, and here we are just beginning to play the big
towns. i have been trying to figure out if there was not someone in the
show who could double in that act and get away with it, mused the
showman. howd you sleep?

fine. is there no one you can think of who could fill the bill, mr.
sparling?

no; thats the rub. you know of anyone?

how about myself.

what?

mr. sparling surveyed the lad in surprised inquiry.

i think i can make a pretty fair showing on the rings. of course, if
signor navaro gets well and comes back, i shall be glad to give the act
back to him. i know something about the flying rings.

young man, is there anything in this show that you cant do? demanded
mr. sparling, with an attempt at sternness.

a great many things, sir. then, again, there are some others that i
have confidence enough in myself to believe i can do. you see, i have
been practicing on the rings ever since i joined out.

but you are only one. we shall need two performers, objected the
owner.

teddy tucker has been working with me. he is fully as good on the
flying rings as i am, if not better.

h-m-m-m! mused the showman. come over to the big top and lets see
what you really can do, he said, starting up.

phil ran in search of teddy and in a few minutes the two boys appeared
in the arena, ready for the rehearsal.

mr. miaco, who had been called on and informed of the news, accompanied
them. it was he who hauled the boys up to the rings far up toward the
top of the tent.

get a net under there! we dont want to lose any more performers this
season, the clown commanded.

after some little delay the net was spread and the showman motioned for
the performance to proceed, walking over and taking his seat on the
boards so that he might watch the performance from the viewpoint of the
audience.

with the utmost confidence the boys went through the act without a
slip. they did everything that signor navaro had done in his
performance, adding some clever feats of their own that had been
devised with the help of mr. miaco. mr. sparling looked on with
twinkling eyes and frequent nods of approval.

fine! fine! one of the best flying-ring acts i ever saw, he shouted,
when finally the lads rounded out their act by a series of rapid
evolutions commonly known as skinning the cat. even in this their act
was attended with variations.

the boys concluded by a graceful drop into the net, from which they
bounded into the air, swung themselves to the ground, each throwing a
kiss to the grinning manager.

a number of performers who had been a witness to the performance
clapped their hands and shouted bravo!

mr. sparling called the lads to him.

the act is yours, he said. it is better than navaros. each of you
will draw twenty five dollars a week for the rest of the season, he
announced to the proud circus boys, who thereupon ran to the dressing
tent to take a quick bath and get into their costumes ready for the
parade.

see to it that they have the net spread, mr. ducro, he directed.
never permit them to perform without it.

that afternoon the boys made their first appearance in the flying-ring
exhibition, and their act really proved a sensation. mr. sparling, who
was observing it from the side, kept his head bobbing with nods of
approval and muttered comments.

after the show phil suggested that thereafter teddy be allowed to use a
clown makeup, because his funny antics in the air were more fitted to
the character of a clown than to that of a finished performer.

to this the owner readily agreed, and that night they tried it with
tremendous success.

the days that followed were bright ones for the circus boys. each day
seemed an improvement over the previous one. the season drew rapidly to
a close and they looked forward to the day with keen regret.

one day mr. sparling summoned them to his tent.

are you boys ready to sign up for next season? he asked.

i should like to, answered phil.

this will be a railroad show next season, the third largest show on
the road, and i want you both.

thank you; i shall join gladly.

so will i, chorused teddy.

your salaries will be fifty dollars a week next season. and if you
wish a vaudeville engagement for the winter i think i shall be able to
get one for you.

we are going to school, mr. sparling. teddy and i will be hard at work
over our books next week. but we are going to keep up our practice all
winter and perhaps we may have some new acts to surprise you with in
the spring, laughed phil, his face aglow with happiness.

a week later found the lads back in edmeston, bronzed, healthy, manly
and admired by all who saw them. phil had nearly four hundred dollars
in the bank, while teddy had about one hundred less.

phils first duty after greeting mrs. cahill was to call on his uncle,
who begrudgingly allowed his nephew to shake hands with him. next day
the circus boys dropped into their old routine life and applied
themselves to their studies, at the same time looking forward to the
day when the grass should grow green again and the little red wagons
roll out for their summer journeyings.

here we will leave them. but phil and his companion will be heard from
again in a following volume, to be published immediately, entitled,
the circus boys across the continent; or, winning new laurels on the
tanbark. in this volume their thrilling adventures under the billowing
canvas are to be continued, leading them on to greater triumphs and
successes.




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the circus boys on the flying rings ***

updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
united states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

start: full license

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project
gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.e.8.

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the
foundation" or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg-tm license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this
  ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the
  united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this ebook.

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "project
gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg-tm license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
  to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
  gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
  gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
  section 4, "information about donations to the project gutenberg
  literary archive foundation."

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
  license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg-tm
  works.

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.

the foundation's business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

this website includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.


