the project gutenberg ebook of the moravians in georgia, by adelaide l. fries

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: the moravians in georgia
       1735-1740

author: adelaide l. fries

release date: june, 1996  [etext #570]
posting date: november 27, 2009
last updated: november 6, 2016

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the moravians in georgia ***




produced by a. light





the moravians in georgia

1735-1740


by adelaide l. fries


(note on text: italicized words or phrases are capitalized. a few
obvious errors have been corrected. many german names with umlauts have
had the umlaut replaced with an e following the vowel (according to
standard form) due to the limitations of ascii. these names are noted in
the index.)



winston-salem, n. c.




preface.


in the life of any individual, association, or nation, there will
probably be one or more occurrences which may be considered as success
or failure according to the dramatic features of the event and the
ultimate results. of this the battle of bunker hill is a striking
example. on the morning of june 17th, 1775, a force of british soldiers
attacked a small body of raw, ill-equipped american volunteers, who
had fortified a hill near boston, and quickly drove them from their
position. by whom then was the bunker hill monument erected? by the
victors in that first engagement of the revolution? no, but by proud
descendants of the vanquished, whose broader view showed them
the incalculable benefits arising from that seeming defeat, which
precipitated the great struggle, forcing every man in the colonies to
take a position squarely for or against the american cause, convinced
the timid that only proper equipment would be needed to enable the
american army to hold its own against the foe, and taught the british
that they were dealing, not with hot-headed rebels who would run at
first sight of the dreaded red coats, but with patriots who would
stand their ground so long as a charge of powder remained, or gunstocks
could be handled as clubs.

very much the same line of argument may be applied to the first attempt
of the moravian church to establish a settlement on the american
continent. the story is usually passed over by historians in a few short
paragraphs, and yet without the colony in georgia, the whole history of
the renewed church of the unitas fratrum would have been very different.
without that movement the moravian church might never have been
established in england, without it the great methodist denomination
might never have come into being, without it the american moravian
provinces, north or south, might not have been planned. of course
providence might have provided other means for the accomplishment of
these ends, but certain it is that in the actual development of all
these things the unsuccessful attempt in georgia, 1735 to 1740, played
a most important part.

in preparing this history a number of private libraries, the collections
of the georgia historical society, the congressional library, the
british museum, were searched for data, but so little was found that
the story, in so far as it relates to the moravian settlement, has been
drawn entirely from the original manuscripts in the archives of the
unitas fratrum at herrnhut, germany, with some additions from the
archives at bethlehem, pa., and salem, n. c. for the general history of
georgia, of the moravian church, and of the wesleys, stevens history of
georgia, hamiltons history of the moravian church, leverings history
of bethlehem, pa., some fathers of the american moravian church, by
de schweinitz, strobels history of the salzburgers, tyremans oxford
methodists, and wesleys journal have been most largely used.

the history of the moravian settlement in georgia falls into that period
when dates are much confused through the contemporaneous use of the old
style, or julian calendar, and the new style, or gregorian calendar. as
the latter is now current everywhere, except in russia and the orient,
it is here employed throughout, old style dates being translated where
they occur in the records.

special thanks are due to rev. a. glitsch, archivist at herrnhut,
for courtesies extended while the author was examining the invaluable
collection of papers entrusted to his care, and also for his supervision
of the copying of such documents as were selected; to mr. isaac beckett,
of savannah, for information respecting the moravian lands; to mr. john
jordan, of philadelphia, for copies of deeds and other papers relating
to the settlement; to mr. w. s. pfohl, of salem, for assistance with the
illustrations; and to mr. john w. fries for suggestion and inspiration
for the work, and the constant encouragement and sympathetic interest
without which the authors courage would have failed during the tedious
years of gathering material for the book, which is now presented
to those who may find in it something of explanation, something of
interest, concerning the moravian settlement in georgia, and the broader
history which the story touches on every side.

                                                  adelaide l. fries.
august, 1904.



table of contents.


     chapter i.  antecedent events.
       the province of georgia.
       the salzburgers.
       unitas fratrum.
       halle opposition.

     chapter ii.  negotiations with the trustees of georgia.
       the schwenkfelders.
       preliminary steps.
       the first company.

     chapter iii.  the first year in georgia.
       the voyage.
       making a start.
       aim and attainment.

     chapter iv.  reinforcements.
       the second company.
       four journals.
       organization.

     chapter v.  the second year in georgia.
       the english clergymen.
       work among the indians.
       the society.
       rumors of war.

     chapter vi.  disintegration.
       spangenbergs visit.
       a closing door.
       wesley, ingham and toeltschig.
       the negro mission.

     chapter vii.  conclusion.
       later attempts in georgia.
       the savannah lands.
       arrivals, departures, deaths.
       summary.




the moravians in georgia, 1735-1740.




chapter i. antecedent events.



  the province of georgia.

it was in the year 1728 that the english parliament was persuaded by
james oglethorpe, esq.--soldier, statesman and philanthropist,--to
appoint a committee to investigate the condition of the debtors confined
in the fleet and marchalsea prisons. the lot of these debtors was a
most pitiable one, for a creditor had power to imprison a man for an
indefinite term of years, and the unfortunate debtor, held within the
four walls of his prison, could earn no money to pay the debt that was
owing, and unless friends came to his rescue, was utterly at the
mercy of the oft-times barbarous jailor. the committee, consisting of
ninety-six prominent men, with oglethorpe as chairman, recommended and
secured the redress of many grievances, and the passing of better laws
for the future, but oglethorpe and a few associates conceived a plan
which they thought would eradicate the evil by striking at its very
root, the difficulty which many found in earning a living in the
overcrowded cities.

in 1663 king charles ii. had granted to eight lords proprietors the
portion of north america lying between the 31st and 36th degrees of
latitude, enlarging the boundaries in 1665 to 29 deg. and 36 deg. 30
min. by 1728 most of these lords proprietors had tired of their attempt
to govern the colonies they had established in carolina, and in
1729 seven of the eight sold their interest to the english crown, the
district being divided into north carolina, south carolina, and a
more southerly portion, nominally included in the latter, which was held
in reserve.

to this unused land the thoughts of oglethorpe turned, and he and his
friends addressed a memorial to the privy council, stating that the
cities of london, westminster, and parts adjacent, do abound with great
numbers of indigent persons, who are reduced to such necessity as to
become burthensome to the public, and who would be willing to seek a
livelihood in any of his majestys plantations in america, if they were
provided with a passage, and means of settling there. they therefore
asked for a grant of land lying south of the savannah river, where they
wished to establish a colony in which these unfortunate men might begin
life anew, and where protestants, persecuted in some parts of europe,
might find a refuge. they also offered to take entire charge of the
affair, and their petition, after passing through the usual channels,
was approved by the king, george ii, a charter was prepared, and the
great seal was affixed june 9th, 1732.

this instrument constituted twenty-one noblemen and gentlemen a body
corporate, by the name and style of the trustees for establishing the
colony of georgia in america, and in them was vested full authority for
the collecting of subscriptions and the expending of moneys gathered,
the selection of colonists, and the making and administering of laws
in georgia; but no member of the corporation was allowed to receive
a salary, or any fees, or to hold land in the new province. the
undertaking was to be strictly for the good of others, not for their
own pecuniary benefit. the charter granted to them all those lands,
countries, and territories situate, lying and being in that part of
south carolina, in america between the savannah and altamaha, gave them
permission to take over any british subjects, or foreigners willing to
become such, and guaranteed to each settler the rights of an english
subject, and full liberty of conscience,--papists alone excepted. this
apparently pointed exception was natural enough, since from a political
standpoint the new colony was regarded as a valuable guard for the
protestant english colonies on the north, against the indians and
roman catholic colonists to the south, who had been keeping the border
settlers in a continual state of uneasiness, even in times of nominal
peace. moreover england had not forgotten the terrible experience of
the latter half of the preceding century, when it was war to the death
between catholic and protestant, and the latter party being the stronger
the former was subjected to great and unpardonable persecution, many
were executed, and all holding that faith were laid under political
disabilities which lasted for a hundred and fifty years.

the plans of the trustees were very broad. they intended to relieve
such unfortunate persons as cannot subsist here, and establish them in
an orderly manner, so as to form a well regulated town. as far as their
fund goes they will defray the charge of their passage to georgia--give
them necessaries, cattle, land, and subsistence, till such time as they
can build their houses and clear some of their land. in this manner
many families who would otherwise starve will be provided for, and
made masters of houses and lands; * * * and by giving refuge to the
distressed salzburgers and other protestants, the power of britain, as a
reward for its hospitality, will be increased by the addition of so many
religious and industrious subjects.

each of the emigrants was to receive about fifty acres of land,
including a town lot, a garden of five acres, and a forty-five acre
farm, and the trustees offered to give a tract of five hundred acres to
any well-to-do man who would go over at his own expense, taking with
him at least ten servants, and promising his military service in case of
need.

but there was a commercial as well as a benevolent side to the designs
of the trustees, for they thought georgia could be made to furnish silk,
wine, oil and drugs in large quantities, the importing of which would
keep thousands of pounds sterling in english hands which had hitherto
gone to china, persia and the madeiras. special provision was therefore
made to secure the planting of mulberry trees as the first step towards
silk culture, the other branches to be introduced as speedily as might
be.

filled with enthusiasm for their plan, the trustees proceeded to spread
abroad the most glowing descriptions of the country where the new colony
was to be settled.

     the kind spring, which but salutes us here,
      inhabits there, and courts them all the year.
     ripe fruits and blossoms on the same trees live--
      at once they promise, when at once they give.
     so sweet the air, so moderate the clime,
      none sickly lives, or dies before his time.
     heaven, sure, has kept this spot of earth uncurst,
      to shew how all things were created first.

so wrote oglethorpe, quoting the lines as the best pen picture he could
give of the new land, and truly, if the colonists found the reality less
roseate than they anticipated, it was not the fault of their generous,
energetic leader, who spared neither pains nor means in his effort to
make all things work out as his imagination had painted them.

the trustees having, with great care, selected thirty-five families from
the number who wished to go, the first emigrant ship sailed for georgia
in november, 1732, bearing about one hundred and twenty-five sober,
industrious and moral persons, and all needful stores for the
establishment of the colony. early in the following year they reached
america, and oglethorpe, having chosen a high bluff on the southern bank
of the savannah river, concluded a satisfactory treaty with tomochichi,
the chief of the nearest indian tribe, which was later ratified in a
full council of the chiefs of all the lower creeks. his fairness and
courteous treatment won the hearts of all, especially of tomochichi and
his people, who for many years remained on the best of terms with the
town which was now laid out upon the bluff.


  the salzburgers.

the salzburgers, referred to by name in the proposals of the georgia
trustees, were, at this time, very much upon the mind and heart of
protestant europe. they were germans, belonging to the archbishopric of
salzburg, then the most eastern district of bavaria, but now a province
of austria. their ancestors, the vallenges of piedmont, had been
compelled by the barbarities of the dukes of savoy to find a shelter
from the storms of persecution in the alpine passes and vales of
salzburg and the tyrol, before the reformation; and frequently since,
they had been hunted out by the hirelings and soldiery of the church of
rome, and condemned for their faith to tortures of the most cruel
and revolting kind. in 1684-6, they were again threatened with an
exterminating persecution; but were saved in part by the intervention
of the protestant states of saxony and brandenburg, though more than a
thousand emigrated on account of the dangers to which they were exposed.

but the quietness which they then enjoyed for nearly half a century
was rudely broken in upon by leopold, count of firmian and archbishop of
salzburg, who determined to reduce them to the papal faith and power.
he began in the year 1729, and ere he ended in 1732 not far from thirty
thousand had been driven from their homes, to seek among the protestant
states of europe that charity and peace which were denied them in the
glens and fastnesses of their native alps.

the march of these salzburgers constitutes an epoch in the history of
germany. * * * arriving at augsburg, the magistrates closed the gates
against them, refusing them entrance to that city which, two hundred
years before, through luther and melancthon and in the presence of
charles v and the assembled princes of germany, had given birth to the
celebrated augsburg confession, for clinging to which the salzburgers
were now driven from their homes; but overawed by the protestants, the
officers reluctantly admitted the emigrants, who were kindly entertained
by the lutherans.

the sympathies of reformed christendom were awakened on their behalf,
and the most hospitable entertainment and assistance were everywhere
given them. only a few months after the signing of the georgia colony
charter, the society for the propagation of christian knowledge
 requested the trustees to include the salzburgers in their plans. the
trustees expressed their willingness to grant lands, and to manage any
money given toward their expenses, but stated that they then held no
funds which were available for that purpose.

in may, 1733, the house of commons appropriated 10,000 pounds to the
trustees of georgia, to be applied towards defraying the charges
of carrying over and settling foreign and other protestants in said
colony, and over 3,000 pounds additional having been given privately,
the trustees, at the suggestion of herr von pfeil, consul of wittenberg
at regensberg, wrote to senior samuel urlsperger, pastor of the lutheran
church of st. ann in the city of augsburg, who had been very kind to
the salzburgers on their arrival there, and ever afterward watched over
their welfare with the solicitude of an affectionate father. on receipt
of the invitation from the trustees, seventy-eight persons decided to go
to georgia, and left augsburg on the 21st of october, reaching rotterdam
the 27th of november, where they were joined by two ministers, rev. mr.
bolzius, deputy superintendent of the latin orphan school at halle,
and rev. mr. gronau, a tutor in the same, who were to accompany them to
their new home. in england they were treated with marked kindness, and
when they sailed, january 19, 1734, it was with the promise of free
transportation to georgia, and support there until they could reap their
first harvest from the fifty acres which were to be given to each man
among them.

they reached charlestown, south carolina, the following march, and
met general oglethorpe, the governor of georgia, who was intending an
immediate return to europe, but went back to help them select a suitable
place for their settlement, they preferring not to live in savannah
itself. the site chosen was about twenty-five miles from savannah, on
a large stream flowing into the savannah river, and there they laid out
their town, calling it ebenezer, in grateful remembrance of the divine
help that had brought them thither. baron von reck, who had accompanied
them as commissary of the trustees, stayed with them until they had made
a good beginning, and then returned to europe, leaving ebenezer about
the middle of may.


  unitas fratrum.

but while the salzburgers received so much sympathy and kindness in
germany on account of their distress, other exiled protestants, whose
story was no less touching, were being treated with scant courtesy and
consideration.

on the 6th of july, 1415, the bohemian reformer, john hus, was burned at
the stake. but those who had silenced him could not unsay his message,
and at last there drew together a little body of earnest men, who agreed
to accept the bible as their only standard of faith and practice, and
established a strict discipline which should keep their lives in the
simplicity, purity, and brotherly love of the early apostolic church.
this was in 1457, and the movement quickly interested the thoughtful
people in all classes of society, many of whom joined their ranks.
the formal organization of the unitas fratrum (the unity of brethren)
followed, and its preaching, theological publications, and educational
work soon raised it to great influence in bohemia, moravia, and poland,
friendly intercourse being established with luther, calvin, and other
reformers as they became prominent.

then came destruction, when the religious liberty of bohemia and moravia
was extinguished in blood, by the church of rome. the great comenius
went forth, a wanderer on the face of the earth, welcomed and honored
in courts and universities, introducing new educational principles that
revolutionized methods of teaching, but ever longing and praying for the
restoration of his church; and by his publication of its doctrine and
rules of discipline, and by his careful transmission of the episcopate
which had been bestowed upon him and his associate bishops, he did
contribute largely to that renewal which he was not destined to see.

in the home lands there were many who held secretly, tenaciously,
desperately, to the doctrines they loved, in hope against hope that
the great oppression would be lifted. but the passing of a hundred years
brought no relief, concessions granted to others were still denied
to the children of those who had been the first protestants against
religious slavery and corruption, and in 1722 a small company of
descendants of the ancient unitas fratrum slipped over the borders of
moravia, and went to saxony, nicholas lewis, count zinzendorf, having
given them permission to sojourn on his estates until they could find
suitable homes elsewhere.

hearing that they had reached a place of safety, other moravians took
their lives in their hands and followed, risking the imprisonment and
torture which were sure to follow an unsuccessful attempt to leave a
province, the government of which would neither allow them to be happy
at home nor to sacrifice everything and go away. among these emigrants
were five young men, who went in may, 1724, with the avowed intention
of trying to resuscitate the unitas fratrum. they intended to go into
poland, where the organization of the unitas fratrum had lasted for a
considerable time after its ruin in bohemia, but, almost by accident,
they decided to first visit christian david, who had led the first
company to herrnhut, saxony, and while there they became convinced
that god meant them to throw in their lot with these refugees, and so
remained, coming to be strong leaders in the renewed unity.

several years, however, elapsed before the church was re-established.
one hundred years of persecution had left the moravians only traditions
of the usages of the fathers, members of other sects who were in trouble
came and settled among them, bringing diverse views, and things were
threatening to become very much involved, when count zinzendorf, who
had hitherto paid little attention to them, awoke to the realization of
their danger, and at once set to work to help them.

it was no easy task which he undertook, for the moravians insisted on
retaining their ancient discipline, and he must needs try to please
them and at the same time preserve the bond of union with the state
church,--the lutheran,--of which, as his tenants, they were officially
considered members. his tact and great personal magnetism at last healed
the differences which had sprung up between the settlers, the opportune
finding of comenius ratio disciplinae enabled them with certainty to
formulate rules that agreed with those of the ancient unitas fratrum,
and a marked outpouring of the holy spirit at a communion, august 13th,
1727, sealed the renewal of the church.

     they walked with god in peace and love,
      but failed with one another;
     while sternly for the faith they strove,
      brother fell out with brother;
     but he in whom they put their trust,
      who knew their frames, that they were dust,
     pitied and healed their weakness.

     he found them in his house of prayer,
      with one accord assembled,
     and so revealed his presence there,
      they wept for joy and trembled;
     one cup they drank, one bread they brake,
      one baptism shared, one language spake,
     forgiving and forgiven.

     then forth they went with tongues of flame
      in one blest theme delighting,
     the love of jesus and his name
      gods children all uniting!
     that love our theme and watchword still;
      that law of love may we fulfill,
     and love as we are loved.
                                    (montgomery.)


at this time there was no thought of separating from the state church
and establishing a distinct denomination, and zinzendorf believed that
the unitas fratrum could exist as a society working in, and in harmony
with, the state church of whatever nation it might enter. this idea,
borrowed probably from speners ecclesiolae in ecclesia, clung to
him, even after circumstances had forced the unity to declare its
independence and the validity of the ordination of its ministry, and
many otherwise inexplicable things in the later policy of the church may
be traced to its influence.


  halle opposition.

in 1734 zinzendorf took orders in the lutheran church, but this, and
all that preceded it, seemed to augment rather than quiet the antagonism
which the development of herrnhut aroused in certain quarters. this
opposition was not universal. the moravians had many warm friends and
advocates at the saxon court, at the universities of jena and tuebingen,
and elsewhere, but they also had active enemies who drew their
inspiration principally from the university of halle.

the opposition of halle seems to have been largely prompted by jealousy.
in 1666 a revolt against the prevailing cold formalism of the lutheran
church was begun by philip jacob spener, a minister of that church,
who strongly urged the need for real personal piety on the part of each
individual. his ideas were warmly received by some, and disliked by
others, who stigmatized spener and his disciples as pietists, but
the doctrine spread, and in the course of time the university of
halle became its centre. among those who were greatly attracted by the
movement were count zinzendorfs parents and grandparents, and when he
was born, may 26th, 1700, spener was selected as his sponsor.

being of a warm-hearted, devout nature, young zinzendorf yielded readily
to the influence of his pious grandmother, to whose care he was left
after his fathers death and his mothers second marriage, and by her
wish he entered the paedagogium at halle in 1710, remaining there
six years. then his uncle, fearing that he would become a religious
enthusiast, sent him to the university of wittenberg, with strict orders
to apply himself to the study of law. here he learned to recognize the
good side of the wittenberg divines, who were decried by halle, and
tried to bring the two universities to a better understanding, but
without result.

in 1719 he was sent on an extensive foreign tour, according to custom,
and in the picture gallery of duesseldorf saw an ecce homo with its
inscription this have i done for thee, what hast thou done for me?
 which settled him forever in his determination to devote his whole life
to the service of christ.

rather against his wishes, count zinzendorf then took office under the
saxon government, but about the same time he bought from his grandmother
the estate of berthelsdorf, desiring to establish a centre of piety,
resembling halle. the coming of the moravian and other refugees and
their settlement at herrnhut, near berthelsdorf, was to him at first
only an incident; but as their industry and the preaching of pastor
rothe, whom he had put in charge of the berthelsdorf lutheran church,
began to attract attention, he went to halle, expecting sympathy from
his friends there. instead he met with rebuke and disapproval, the
leaders resenting the fact that he had not placed the work directly
under their control, and apparently realizing, as he did not, that the
movement would probably lead to the establishment of a separate church.

in spite of their disapprobation, the work at herrnhut prospered, and
the more it increased the fiercer their resentment grew. that they,
who had gained their name from their advocacy of the need for personal
piety, should have been foremost in opposing a man whose piety was his
strongest characteristic, and a people who for three hundred years, in
prosperity and adversity, in danger, torture and exile, had held christ
and him crucified as their confession of faith, and pure and simple
living for his sake as their object in life, is one of the ironies of
history.

nor did the halle party confine itself to criticism. some years later
zinzendorf was for a time driven into exile, and narrowly escaped the
confiscation of all his property, while its methods of obstructing the
missionary and colonizing efforts of the moravians will appear in the
further history of the georgia colony.




chapter ii. negotiations with the trustees of georgia.



  the schwenkfelders.

among those who came to share the hospitalities of count zinzendorf
during the years immediately preceding the renewal of the unitas
fratrum, were a company of schwenkfelders. their sojourn on his estate
was comparatively brief, and their association with the moravian church
only temporary, but they are of interest because their necessities led
directly to the moravian settlements in georgia and pennsylvania.

the schwenkfelders took their name from casper schwenkfeld, a silesian
nobleman contemporary with luther, who had in the main embraced the
reformers doctrines, but formed some opinions of his own in regard
to the lords supper, and one or two other points. his followers were
persecuted in turn by lutherans and jesuits, and in 1725 a number of
them threw themselves on the mercy of count zinzendorf. he permitted
them to stay for a while at herrnhut, where their views served to
increase the confusion which prevailed prior to the revival of 1727,
about which time he moved them to ober-berthelsdorf.

in 1732, zinzendorfs personal enemies accused him, before the saxon
court, of being a dangerous man, and the austrian government complained
that he was enticing its subjects to remove to his estates. the count
asked for a judicial investigation, which was granted, the prefect of
goerlitz spending three days in a rigid examination of the affairs of
herrnhut. the result was a most favorable report, showing the orthodoxy
of the settlers, and that instead of urging emigration from bohemia and
moravia, zinzendorf had protested against it, receiving only those
who were true exiles for conscience sake. in spite of this the
saxon government, a few months later, forbade him to receive any more
refugees.

in april, 1733, a decree went forth that all schwenkfelders were to
leave the kingdom of saxony. this, of course, affected those who were
living at ober-berthelsdorf, and a committee of four waited on count
zinzendorf, and requested him to secure a new home for them in the land
of georgia in north america. probably zinzendorf, whose attention
had been caught by the attractive advertisements of the trustees, had
unofficially suggested the idea to them.

lest his opening negotiations with the english company should foment the
trouble at home, he sent his first communication to them anonymously,
about the end of 1733.

a nobleman, of the protestant religion, connected with the most
influential families of germany, has decided to live for a time in
america, without, however, renouncing his estates in germany. but as
circumstances render it inadvisable for him to take such a step hastily,
he wishes to send in advance a number of families of his dependents,
composed of honest, sturdy, industrious, skillful, economical people,
well ordered in their domestic affairs, who, having no debts, will try
to sell such possessions as they cannot take with them in order to raise
the funds for establishing themselves in their new home.

this nobleman, on his part, promises:

(1) to be governed by the king, and the english nation, in all things,
matters of conscience alone excepted; that is, he will be true to the
prince, the protestant succession, and parliament in everything relating
to the estates he may receive in this country, and thereto will pledge
his life, and the property he may in future hold under the protection of
his majesty of great britain.

(2) to be surety for the dependents that he sends over, and to assume
only such jurisdiction over them as is customary among english lords on
their estates.

(3) to carefully repay the english nation such sums as may be advanced
for his establishment in georgia, and moreover, as soon as the property
is in good condition, to consider it only as rented until the obligation
is discharged.

(4) to assist the king and nation, with all zeal and by all means in his
power, to carry out his majestys designs for georgia. he will bring to
that all the insight and knowledge of a man of affairs, who from youth
up has studied the most wholesome principles and laws for a state, and
has had personal experience in putting them into execution; but, on the
other hand, he has learned such self-control that he will meddle with
nothing in which his services are not desired.

in consideration of these things the nobleman asks that--

(1) if more knowledge of his standing is desired he shall be expected to
give it to no one except a committee of parliament, composed of members
of both houses, appointed by his britannic majesty, or to a committee of
the collegii directoriatis of america, who shall be empowered to grant
his requests; this in view of the fact that the petitioner is a german
nobleman, whose family is well known, his father having been ambassador
to england, and his kindred among the foremost statesmen of europe.

(2) after the committee has received sufficient and satisfactory
information it shall be silent in regard to the circumstances and
his personality, as he has weighty reasons for not wishing to subject
himself to criticism.

(3) he shall be given a written agreement, guaranteeing the following
things:

 a.  that he shall receive enough land for a household
 of fifty to sixty persons, and for about a hundred other dependents,
 most of whom have a trade or profession, and all able
 to help build up the country.

 b.  that his dependents shall be given free transportation,
 and supplies for the voyage.

 c.  that they shall be taken directly to the place mentioned
 in the agreement.

 d.  that he and his agent shall have certain sums advanced to him
 for the expenses of the removal to georgia, the money to be given them
 only when they are ready to embark in england,--payment to be made
 several years later, a rate of interest having been mutually agreed on,
 and the estate in georgia being given for security if necessary.

 e.  all that is needed for the building of a village for himself and
 his dependents shall be furnished them,--but as an interest bearing loan.

 f.  that he, and the colonists who will go with him, shall have
 full religious liberty, they being neither papists nor visionaries.

 g.  that if any of his dependents should fall into error
 no one should attempt to correct them, but leave him to handle the matter
 according to his own judgment; on the other hand he will stand surety
 for the conduct of his dependents as citizens.

 h.  that he and his descendents shall be taken under the protection
 of the english nation if they request it.

 i.  that he may be permitted to choose whether he will go himself to georgia,
 or send a representative to set his affairs in order, and if the latter,
 then the representative shall receive the courteous treatment
 that would have been accorded him.

 j.  that those among his colonists who wish to preach the gospel
 to the heathen shall be allowed to do so; and their converts shall have
 the same religious freedom as his colonists.

 k.  that he and his dependents in georgia shall be given the privileges
 in spiritual affairs which the independent lords of germany enjoy
 in temporal affairs.

 l.  that all his property shall be at the service of the state
 in time of need, but neither he nor his dependents shall be called on
 for military duty, in lieu whereof he will, if necessary,
 pay a double war tax.

from this document it appears that even at this early stage of the
negotiations zinzendorfs plans for the settlement in georgia were well
matured. a town was to be built by his colonists, where they should have
all privileges for the free exercise of their religion; they, as thrifty
citizens, were to assist in the upbuilding of georgia; they were to
preach the gospel to the heathen; they were not to bear arms, but in
case of war to pay a double tax. his careful avoidance of the plea
of religious persecution was caused by the fact that his own king had
ordered the exile of the schwenkfelders, for zinzendorf all his life
sought to pay due respect to those in authority, and even when his
conscience forced him to differ with them it was done with perfect
courtesy, giving equal weight to all parts of the commandment honor all
men; love the brotherhood; fear god; honor the king.

the proposals of the count were forwarded through herr von pfeil, and
were presented to the trustees of the colony of georgia by a mr. lorenz.
who this gentleman was does not appear, but a man bearing that name was
one of the germans, living in london, who in 1737 formed a society for
religious improvement under the influence of count zinzendorf.

through the same channel the answer of the trustees was returned:

mr. lorenz,

the proposals sent by baron pfeil from ratisbon (regensberg) to the
trustees of georgia have been read at their meeting, but as they see
that the gentleman asks pecuniary assistance for the establishment he
contemplates, they answer that they have absolutely no fund from which
to defray such expenses, but that in case the gentleman who suggests it
wishes to undertake the enterprise at his own cost they will be able to
grant him land in georgia on conditions to which no one could object,
and which he may learn as soon as the trustees have been informed that
he has decided to go at his own expense. you will have the kindness to
forward this to baron pfeil, and oblige,

     your most humble
                         servant j. vernon.

whether this plea of no fund was prompted by indifference, or whether
they really considered the money appropriated by parliament as intended
for the salzburgers alone, is immaterial. perhaps zinzendorfs very
proposals to consider any assistance as a loan made them think him able
to finance the scheme himself.

the schwenkfelders, being under orders to expatriate themselves,
left berthelsdorf on the 26th of may, 1734, under the leadership of
christopher wiegner (sometimes called george in moravian mss.) and at
their request george boehnisch, one of the herrnhut moravians, went with
them. their plan was to go through holland to england, and thence to
georgia, but in the former country they changed their minds and sailed
for pennsylvania. in december of the same year spangenberg was in
rotterdam, where he lodged with a dr. koker, from whom he learned the
reason for their, until then, unexplained behavior. dr. koker belonged
to a society calling themselves the collegiants, the membership of
which was drawn from the reformed, lutheran, and various other churches.
their cardinal principles were freedom of speech, freedom of belief, and
liberty to retain membership in their own denominations if they desired.
the society was really an offshoot of the baptist church, differing,
however, in its non-insistance upon a particular form of baptism. twice
a year the members met in the lords supper, to which all were welcomed
whose life was beyond reproach. in holland they enjoyed the same
privileges as other sects, and had a following in amsterdam, haarlem,
rotterdam, leyden, etc.

it appeared that the schwenkfelders had first addressed themselves to
these collegiants, especially to cornelius van putten in haarlem, and
pieter koker in rotterdam, but when their need grew more pressing they
appealed to count zinzendorf. when he was not able to obtain for them
all they wanted, they turned again to the collegiants, and were in
conference with them in rotterdam. the collegiants were very much
opposed to the georgia colony,--the dutch intensely disliked anything
that would connect them with england,--and although thomas coram,
one of the trustees, who happened to be in rotterdam, promised the
schwenkfelders free transportation (which had been refused zinzendorf),
the collegiants persuaded them not to go to georgia. their chief
argument was that the english government sent its convicts to georgia, a
proof that it was not a good land, and the schwenkfelders were also told
that the english intended to use them as slaves.

disturbed by this view of the case, the schwenkfelders accepted an offer
of free transportation to pennsylvania, where they arrived in safety on
the 22nd of september.

spangenberg had wished to serve as their pastor in georgia, thinking it
would give him opportunity to carry out his cherished wish to bear the
gospel message to the heathen, and he felt himself still in a measure
bound to them, despite their change of purpose, and at a somewhat later
time did visit them in their new home. there was some idea of then
taking them to georgia, but it did not materialize, and they remained
permanently in pennsylvania, settling in the counties of montgomery,
berks and lehigh. their descendents there preserve the customs of their
fathers, and are the only representatives of the schwenkfelder form of
doctrine, the sect having become extinct in europe.


  preliminary steps.

while the exile of the schwenkfelders was the immediate cause which
led zinzendorf to open negotiations with the trustees of the colony
of georgia, the impulse which prompted him involved far more than mere
assistance to them. foreign missions, in the modern sense of the word,
were almost unknown in zinzendorfs boyhood, yet from his earliest days
his thoughts turned often to those who lay beyond the reach of gospel
light. in 1730, while on a visit to copenhagen, he heard that the
lutheran missionary hans egede, who for years had been laboring single
handed to convert the eskimos of greenland, was sorely in need of help;
and anthony, the negro body-servant of a count laurwig, gave him a most
pathetic description of the condition of the negro slaves in the danish
west indies.

filled with enthusiasm, zinzendorf returned to herrnhut, and poured the
two stories into willing ears, for ever since the great revival of 1727
the moravian emigrants had been scanning the field, anxious to carry the
good news abroad, and held back only by the apparent impossibility of
going forward. who were they, without influence, without means, without
a country even, that they should take such an office upon themselves?
but the desire remained, and at this summons they prepared to do the
impossible. in august, 1732, two men started for st. thomas,--in april,
1733, three more sailed for greenland, and in the face of hardships that
would have daunted men of less than heroic mold, successful missions
were established at both places.

but this was not enough. my passionate desire, wrote zinzendorf from
herrnhut in january, 1735, my passionate desire to make jesus known
among the heathen has found a satisfaction in the blessed greenland, st.
thomas and lapp work, but without appeasing my hunger. i therefore look
into every opportunity which presents itself, seeking that the kingdom
of my redeemer may be strengthened among men.

nor did he lack ready assistants, for the moravians were as eager as he.
when we in herrnhut heard of georgia, of which much was being published
in the newspapers, and when we realized the opportunity it would give
to carry the truth to the heathen, several brethren, who had the lords
honor much at heart, were led, doubtless by his hand, to think that it
would be a good plan to send some brethren thither, if it might please
the lord to bless our work among the heathen, and so to bring those poor
souls, now far from christ, nigh unto him. we tried to learn about the
land, but could secure no accurate information, for some spoke from
hearsay, others with prejudice, and many more with too great partiality.
but we at last decided to venture, in the faith that the lord would help
us through.

the needs of the schwenkfelders gave a new turn to their thoughts, and
suggested the advantages that might accrue from a settlement in america
to which they might all retreat if the persecution in saxony waxed
violent; but early in the year 1734, the question shall we go to
georgia only as colonists, or also as missionaries? was submitted to
the lot, and the answer was as missionaries also.

the defection of the schwenkfelders, therefore, while a serious
interference with the herrnhut plan, was not allowed to ruin the
project. zinzendorf wrote again to the trustees, and they repeated their
promise of land, provided his colonists would go at their own expense.

after much consultation the decision was reached that zinzendorf should
ask for a tract of five hundred acres, and that ten men should be sent
over to begin a town, their families and additional settlers to follow
them in a few months.

the next step was to find a way to send these men across the atlantic.
baron george philipp frederick von reck, a nephew of herr von pfeil,
who had led the first company of salzburgers to georgia, was planning to
take a second company in the course of the next months. he was young and
enthusiastic, met zinzendorfs overtures most kindly, and even visited
herrnhut in the early part of october, 1734, when, as it happened,
nine of the prospective colonists were formally presented to the
congregation. baron reck was very much impressed, promised to take with
him to georgia any of the moravians who wished to go, and even sent to
david nitschmann, who was to conduct the party as far as london, full
authorization to bring as many as desired to come, promising each
man who went at his own expense a fifty-acre freehold in georgia, and
offering others necessary assistance when they reached london. this
paper was signed at bautzen, october 22nd, 1734.

but reck had failed to realize the force of the halle opposition to
herrnhut, and soon weakened under the weight of persuasion and command
laid upon him by those whose opinion he felt obliged to respect. on the
4th of november he wrote from windhausen to graf stolberg wernigerode,
i have hesitated and vexed myself in much uncertainty whether or not i
should go with the herrnhuters to america. and now i know that god has
heard our prayer at halle and wernigerode, and your letters have decided
me to stay in germany this winter, in the first place because my
going would be a grief to my dear urlsperger, whom i love as a father,
secondly because the english will send over a third transport of
salzburgers in the coming spring and wish me to take them, and thirdly
because i wish to obey worthy and chosen men of god.

he wrote to the same effect to zinzendorf, and the count, though
doubtless annoyed, replied simply: your highness resolution to
accommodate yourself to your superiors would be known by us all for
right. you will then not blame us if we go our way as it is pointed out
to us by the lord.

a few days later reck received a sharp note from the trustees of
georgia, reproving him for his temerity in agreeing to take the
moravians with him to georgia without consulting them, and reiterating
the statement that the funds in their hands had been given for the use
of the salzburgers, and could be used for them alone.

the young man must have winced not a little under all this censure,
but while he yielded his plan to the wishes of the halle party, he
held firmly to the opinion he had formed of the moravians. he wrote to
urlsperger and others in their behalf, declaring that they were a godly
people, much misunderstood, that it was a shame to persecute them and
try to hinder their going to georgia, and he felt sure that if their
opponents would once meet the moravians and converse with them freely,
confidentially, and without prejudice, they would come to respect them
as he did. he also suggested that there were many protestants remaining
in bohemia, who would gladly leave, and who might be secured for georgia
on the terms offered to the salzburgers. the next year in fact, an
effort was made to obtain permission from the austrian government for
the emigration of these people, and reck was authorized by the trustees
to take them to georgia, but nothing came of it.

nor did his championship of the bohemians and moravians already in
saxony have any result. urlsperger was offended that the negotiations
from herrnhut with the trustees were not being carried on through him,
the only one in germany to whom the trustees had sent formal authority
to receive people persecuted on account of religion, or forced to
emigrate, and the halle party were unable or unwilling to meet the
leaders of the moravians without prejudice. the company of salzburgers
therefore sailed for georgia in november without baron von reck, and
without the moravians, mr. vat acting as commissary.

the moravians, meanwhile, were not waiting idly for matters to turn
their way, but even before reck reached his decision spangenberg had
started for england to arrange personally with the georgia trustees for
their emigration.

august gottlieb spangenberg was born july 15th, 1704, at klettenberg,
prussia. in the year 1727, while a student at jena, he became acquainted
with the moravians through a visit of two of their number, which won
them many friends at that institution. later, when he was assistant
professor of theology at halle, he was required to sever his connection
with the moravians, or leave the university, and choosing the latter
he came to herrnhut in the spring of 1733. he was one of the strongest,
ablest, and wisest leaders that the unitas fratrum has ever had, and
eventually became a bishop of the unity, and a member of its governing
board. he was a writer of marked ability, and in his diaries was
accustomed to speak of himself as brother joseph, by which name he was
also widely known among the moravians.

spangenberg left herrnhut in the late summer or early fall of 1734,
bearing with him zinzendorfs power of attorney to receive for him a
grant from the georgia trustees of five hundred acres of land, and
to transact all other necessary business. he stopped for some time in
holland, where he made a number of acquaintances, some of whom gave him
letters of introduction to friends in england and in america, and
others contributed toward the necessary expenses of the emigrants. from
rotterdam he wrote to zinzendorf, saying that he heard no ship would
sail for america before february or march, and that he thought it would
be best for the colonists to wait until he wrote from london, and then
to come by way of altona, as the holland route was very expensive. these
suggestions, however, came too late, as the party had left herrnhut
before the arrival of his letter.

spangenberg had a stormy voyage to england, and on reaching london,
rented a room in mr. barlows coffee house, in wattlings street, near
st. anthelius church. he found the outlook rather discouraging, and a
long letter written on the 10th of january, gives a vivid picture of
the english mind regarding the herrnhuters. spangenberg had called on
several merchants to see if he could arrange a loan for the moravians,
for zinzendorfs means were already strained to the utmost by what he
was doing for the church, and he did not see how it was possible to
provide the money in any other way. but the merchants declined to make
the loan, saying: we can not take the land (in georgia) as surety,
for it is not yet settled, and no man would give us a doit for it; the
personal security (of the emigrants) is also not sufficient, for they
might all die on the sea or in georgia,--there is danger of it, for the
land is warmer than europeans can bear, and many who have moved thither
have died; if they settle on the land and then die the land reverts
to the trustees, so we would lose all; and the six per cent interest
offered is not enough, for the money applied to business would yield
twenty per cent.

others objected to having the moravians go at all, especially court
preacher ziegenhagen, who belonged to the halle party, and who,
spangenberg found, had much influence on account of his good judgment
and spotless character. they claimed: (1) that the moravians were not
oppressed in saxony, and had no good reason for wishing to leave; (2)
that to say they wished to be near the heathen was only an excuse, for
georgia had nothing to do with the west indies where they had a mission;
(3) the moravians could not bear the expense, and neither the trustees
nor the society for the propagation of christian knowledge would help
them; (4) they could neither speak nor understand english, and would
therefore be unable to support themselves in an english colony; (5)
their going would create confusion, for herr bolzius, the pastor of
the salzburgers at ebenezer, had written to beg that they should not be
allowed to come; (6) if they went it would involve england in trouble
with saxony, and the georgia colony was not meant to take other rulers
subjects away from them, only to furnish an asylum for exiles, and poor
englishmen; (7) the moravians could not remain subject to zinzendorf,
for they must all become naturalized englishmen; (8) the suggestion that
zinzendorfs land could be cultivated by the heathen was absurd, for
slavery was not permitted in georgia and the moravians could not afford
to hire them; (9) ten or fifteen men, as were said to be on the way,
would never be able to make headway in settling the forest, a task which
had been almost too much for the large company of salzburgers.

some of these statements dealt with facts, about which the critics
might have acquired better information, had they so desired, others were
prophecies of which only the years to come could prove or disprove
the truth, others again touched difficulties which were even then
confronting count zinzendorfs agent; but in the light of contemporary
writings and later developments, it is possible to glance at each point
and see in how far the halle party were justified in their argument. (1)
the treatment in saxony, while not as yet a persecution which threatened
them with torture and death, had many unpleasant features, and the
constant agitation against them might at any time crystalize into harsh
measures, for those members of the herrnhut community who had left
friends and relatives in the homelands of bohemia and moravia were
already forbidden to invite them to follow, or even to receive them if
they came unasked seeking religious freedom. (2) there was no idea of
associating the missions in georgia and the west indies, for the heathen
whom they wished to reach by this new settlement were the creek and
cherokee indians with whom governor oglethorpe had already established
pleasant relations, bringing several of their chiefs to england, and
sending them home filled with admiration for all they had seen, much
impressed by the kindness shown them, and willing to meet any efforts
that might be made to teach them. (3) the money question was a vital
one, and it was principally to solve that that spangenberg had come to
england, where with oglethorpes help he later succeeded in securing the
desired loan. (4) that they could speak little english was also a real
difficulty; spangenberg used latin in his conferences with the educated
men he met in london, but that medium was useless in georgia, and while
the moravians learned english as rapidly as they could, and proved
their capability for self-support, the failure to fully understand or
be understood by their neighbors was responsible for many of the trials
that were awaiting them in the new world. (5) the protest of bolzius was
only a part of the general salzburger opposition, and to avoid friction
in georgia, zinzendorf had particularly recommended that the moravians
settle in a village apart by themselves, where they could lead godly
lives, patterned after the writings and customs of the apostles,
 without giving offense to any; and he promised, for the same reason,
that as soon as they were established he would send them a regularly
ordained minister, although laymen were doing missionary work in other
fields. (6) in order to avoid any danger of creating trouble between
the governments, the moravian colonists carefully said nothing in london
regarding their difficulties in saxony, or the persecutions in bohemia
and moravia, and instead of proclaiming themselves exiles for the faith
as they might have done with perfect truth, they appeared simply as
count zinzendorfs servants, sent by him to cultivate the five hundred
acres about to be given to him, and by his orders to preach to the
indians. (7) a change of nationality would not affect the relation
between zinzendorf and his colonists, for their position as his
dependents in germany was purely voluntary, such service as they
rendered was freely given in exchange for his legal protection, and
his supremacy in church affairs then and later was a recognition of
the personal character of the man, not a yielding of submission to the
count. (8) that the indians could not be employed on zinzendorfs estate
was quite true, not so much on account of the law against slavery, for
the count intended nothing of that kind, but their character and wild
habits rendered them incapable of becoming good farmers, as the american
nation has learned through many years of effort and failure. (9) whether
the ten or fifteen men, reinforced by those who followed them, would
have been able to make a home in the heart of the forest, will never be
known, for from various reasons the town on the five hundred acre
tract was never begun. in short, while the moravians were risking
much personal discomfort, there was nothing in their plan which could
possibly injure others, and the cavil and abuse of their opposers was as
uncalled for as is many a private opinion publicly expressed to-day.

hearing of the many obstacles which were being thrown in their way, mr.
coram, who was a man of wide charities, and interested in other colonies
besides georgia, suggested to spangenberg that his company should go
to nova scotia, where the climate was milder, and offered them free
transportation and aid in settling there, but this proposal spangenberg
at once rejected, and pinned his faith on the kindness of gen.
oglethorpe, whose return from georgia the preceding july, explained the
more favorable tone of the trustees letters after that date. oglethorpe
asked him numberless questions about the doctrine and practice of the
moravians, and their reasons for wishing to go to georgia, and promised
to lay the matter before the trustees, using all his influence to
further their designs.


  the first company.

on the 14th of january, 1735, the first company of moravian colonists
arrived in london. at their head was david nitschmann,--variously
called the iii, the weaver, the syndic, and count zinzendorfs
hausmeister, who was to stay with them until they left england,
and then return to germany, resigning the leadership of the party to
spangenberg, who was instructed to take them to georgia and establish
them there, and then go to pennsylvania to the schwenkfelders. the other
nine were

  john toeltschig, zinzendorfs flower-gardener.
  peter rose, a gamekeeper.
  gotthard demuth, a joiner.
  gottfried haberecht, weaver of woolen goods.
  anton seifert, a linen weaver.
  george waschke, carpenter.
  michael haberland, carpenter.
  george haberland, mason.
  friedrich riedel, mason.

they were good and true sons of god, and at the same time skillful
workmen, with such a variety of handicrafts as to render them largely
independent of outside assistance in the settlement which they proposed
to make; and all but haberecht were religious refugees from moravia and
adjacent parts of bohemia.

nitschmann and toeltschig were two of the five young men in zauchenthal,
moravia, who had set their hearts on the revival of the ancient unitas
fratrum. toeltschigs father, the village burgess, had summoned the
five comrades before him, and strictly forbidden their holding religious
services, warning them that any attempt at emigration would be severely
punished, and advising them to act as became their youth, frequent the
taverns and take part in dances and other amusements. they were sons of
well-to-do parents, and little more than boys in years, (nitschmann
was only twenty), but their faith and purpose were dearer to them than
anything else on earth, so they had left all and come away, commending
their homes and kindred to the mercy of god, and singing the exile hymn
of the ancient unitas fratrum, sacred through its association with those
brave hearts who had known the bitterness and the joy of exile a hundred
years before.

  blessed the day when i must go
  my fatherland no more to know,
   my lot the exiles loneliness;

  for god will my protector be,
  and angels ministrant for me
   the path with joys divine will bless.

  and god to some small place will guide
  where i may well content abide
   and where this soul of mine may rest.

  as thirsty harts for water burn,
  for thee, my lord and god, i yearn,
   if thou are mine my life is blest.

though holding positions as count zinzendorfs hausmeister and gardener,
both nitschmann and toeltschig were actively employed in the affairs of
the renewed unitas fratrum, and had been to england in 1728 to try to
establish relations with the society for the propagation of christian
knowledge, though without success. they were the better fitted,
therefore, to conduct the party to england, and to share in the
negotiations already begun by spangenberg.

this first company left herrnhut on the 21st of november, 1734,
traveling by ebersdorf (where henry xxix, count reuss, countess
zinzendorfs brother, gave them a letter of recommendation to any whom
they might meet on their way), to holland, whence they had a stormy and
dangerous voyage to england.

the day after they reached london they called on gen. oglethorpe and
having gained admittance with some difficulty they were very well
received by him, carrying on a conversation in a mixture of english and
german, but understanding each other fairly well. spangenberg coming
in most opportunely, the moravian affairs were fully discussed, and the
new-comers learned that their arrival had been fortunately timed, for
the georgia trustees were to hold one of their semi-annual meetings two
days later, when oglethorpe could press their matter, and a ship was to
sail for georgia the latter part of the month. oglethorpe was disturbed
to find that the colonists had failed to raise any money toward their
expenses, but promised to try and assist them in that also.

on the 18th the colonists were formally presented to the trustees,
heard the lively argument for and against their cause, and had the
satisfaction of seeing the vote cast in their favor. it was contrary
to the custom of the trustees to grant lands to any who did not come in
person to apply for them and declare their intention of going to
georgia to settle, but oglethorpes argument that the high rank of count
zinzendorf was entitled to consideration was accepted and five hundred
acres of land were granted to the count and his male heirs.

the indenture bore date of jan. 10, 1734, old style, (jan. 21, 1735,)*
and the five hundred acres were to be set out limited and bounded in
such manner and in such part or parts of the said province as shall be
thought most convenient by such person or persons as shall by the said
common council be for that purpose authorized and appointed, there
being a verbal agreement that the tract should be in the hilly country
some distance from the coast, which, though less accessible and less
easily cultivated, lay near the territory occupied by the indians. five
pounds per annum was named as the quit rent, payment to begin eight
years later; and such part of the tract as was not cleared and improved
during the next eighteen years was to revert to the trustees. the
trustees also agreed that they would reserve two hundred acres near the
larger tract, and whenever formally requested by count zinzendorf,
would grant twenty acres each to such able bodied young men servants as
should arrive and settle with him in the said province of georgia.


     * this is written correctly.  see the authors explanation
     of the calendar in chapter iv.--a. l., 1996.--

in addition to the five hundred acres granted to zinzendorf, fifty acres
were given to spangenberg, and fifty acres to nitschmann, although as
the latter was not going to georgia, and the former did not intend to
stay, this alone was a departure from the custom of the trustees.
each of the fifty acre grants was in three parts, a lot in the town
of savannah, a five acre garden, and a forty-five acre farm, and while
their acquisition had not been a part of the herrnhut plan the colonists
readily yielded to the advice of their english friends, who pointed out
the necessity of having a place to stay when they reached savannah, and
land that they could at once begin to cultivate, without waiting for the
selection and survey of the larger tract. in fact, though they knew it
not, these two grants, which lay side by side, were destined to be the
scene of all their experiences in the province of georgia.

the trustees seem to have been pleased with the appearance of their new
settlers, and approved of their taking passage in the ship that was to
sail the latter part of the month. since the vessel had been chartered
by the trustees, they promised to make no charge for such baggage as
the moravians wished to take with them, arranged that they should have
a portion of the ship for themselves instead of being quartered with
the other passengers, and offered spangenberg a berth in the captains
cabin. this he declined, preferring to share equally with his brethren
in the hardships of the voyage. medicine was put into his hands to
be dispensed to those who might need it, and he was requested to take
charge of about forty swiss emigrants who wished to go in the same
vessel on their way to purisburg in south carolina, where they sought
better material conditions than they had left at home.

land having been secured, gen. oglethorpe arranged that the trustees
should lend the first company 60 pounds, payable in five years, with
the understanding that if repaid within that time the interest should
be remitted, otherwise to be charged at ten per cent., the usual rate in
south carolina. of this 10 pounds was spent in london for supplies,
and 50 pounds paid their passage across the atlantic. the ten men
(spangenberg taking nitschmanns place) pledged themselves jointly and
severally to the payment of the debt, the bond being signed on jan.
22nd, (jan. 11th, o. s.) the day after the grant of the land.

in addition to this oglethorpe collected 26 pounds 5 shillings, as a
gift for the moravians, 10 pounds being presented to them in cash in
london, and the rest forwarded to savannah with instructions that
they should be supplied with cattle, hogs and poultry to that
amount. oglethorpe further instructed messrs. toojesiys and baker, of
charlestown, to honor spangenbergs drafts on him to the amount of 20
pounds, so securing the settlers against possible need in their new
home.

the next day gen. oglethorpe presented spangenberg to the bishop of
london, who received him very kindly. oglethorpes idea was that the
moravians might ally themselves closely with the church of england, and
that the bishop might, if they wished, ordain one of their members from
herrnhut. spangenberg and nitschmann were not authorized to enter into
any such agreement, but both welcomed the opportunity to establish
pleasant relations with the english clergy, and several interviews were
had which served as a good opening for intercourse in later years.

until their vessel sailed, the moravians found plenty to interest
them in the terribly great city, where they were regarded with much
interest, and where they were greatly touched by the unexpected kindness
they received.

they had interviews with the trustees, with mr. vernon, and with gen.
oglethorpe, who gave them much information as to what to expect in their
new home, and many suggestions as to the best way of beginning
their settlement. spangenberg was presented to the society for the
propagation of christian knowledge, was courteously received, offered
more books than he was willing to accept, invited to correspond with the
society, and urged to keep on friendly terms with the salzburgers, which
he assured them he sincerely desired to do. conversations with court
preacher ziegenhagen were not so pleasant, for a letter had come from
senior urlsperger inveighing against the moravians and ziegenhagen put
forth every effort to reclaim spangenberg from the supposed error of
his ways, and to persuade him to stop the company about to start for
georgia, or at least to separate himself from them, and return to the
old friends at halle. oglethorpe smiled at the prejudice against the
moravians, and told them frankly that efforts had been made to influence
him, but he had preferred to wait and judge for himself. it has ever
been so, he said, from the time of the early christians; it seems
to be the custom of theologians to call others heretics. they say, in
short, you do not believe what i believe, a mohammedan also does not
believe what i believe, therefore you are a mohammedan; and again you
explain this bible passage so and so, the socinian also explains it so
and so, therefore you are a socinian. as for opposition, he, too, was
beginning to find it since the georgia colony was proving a success.

meanwhile new friends were springing up on every side of the moravians.
a doctor helped them lay in a store of medicine, another gave them
some balsam which was good for numberless external and internal uses. a
german merchant, who had become an english citizen, helped them purchase
such things as they would require in georgia, and a cobbler assisted
riedel in buying a shoemakers outfit. weapons were offered to all the
members of the party, but declined, as they wished to give no excuse to
any one who might try to press them into military service. they yielded,
however, to the argument that they would need to protect themselves
against wolves and bears, and sent peter rose, the gamekeeper, with mr.
verelst, one of the secretaries of the trustees, to purchase a fowling
piece and hunting knives.

letters of introduction to various prominent men in america were given
to them; and, perhaps most important of all in its future bearing,
people discovered the peculiar charm of the moravian services. reference
is made in the diaries to one and another,--from english clergyman to
germans resident in london,--who joined with them in their devotions,
and seemed much moved thereby. neither was it a passing emotion, for the
seed a little later blossomed into the english moravian church.

and so the month passed swiftly by, and the ship was ready to commence
her long voyage.




chapter iii. the first year in georgia.



  the voyage.

in the year 1735 a voyage across the atlantic was a very different thing
from what it is in this year of grace 1904. to-day a mighty steamship
equipped with powerful engines, plows its way across the billows with
little regard for wind and weather, bearing thousands of passengers,
many of whom are given all the luxury that space permits, a table that
equals any provided by the best hotels ashore, and attendance that is
unsurpassed. then weeks were consumed in the mere effort to get away
from the british isles, the breeze sometimes permitting the small
sailing vessels to slip from one port to another, and then holding them
prisoner for days before another mile could be gained. even the most
aristocratic voyager was forced to be content with accommodations and
fare little better than that supplied to a modern steerage passenger,
and those who could afford it took with them a private stock of
provisions to supplement the ships table.

and yet the spell of adventure or philanthropy, gain or religion, was
strong upon the souls of men, and thousands sought the new world, where
their imagination saw the realization of all their dreams. bravely they
crossed the fathomless deep which heaved beneath them, cutting them off
so absolutely from the loved ones left at home, from the wise counsels
of those on whom they were accustomed to depend, and from the strong arm
of the government under whose promised protection they sailed, to work
out their own salvation in a country where each man claimed to be a law
unto himself, and where years were to pass before experience had once
more taught the lesson that real freedom was to be gained only through a
general recognition of the rights of others.

on the 3rd of february, 1735, the moravians arose early in their london
lodging house, prayed heartily together, and then prepared to go aboard
their vessel, the two brothers, capt. thomson, where the trustees
wished to see all who intended to sail on her. a parting visit was paid
to gen. oglethorpe, who presented them with a hamper of wine, and gave
them his best wishes. after the review on the boat spangenberg and
nitschmann returned with mr. vernon to london to attend to some last
matters, while the ship proceeded to gravesend for her supply of water,
where spangenberg rejoined her a few days later. on the 25th of february
they passed the azores, and disembarked at savannah, april 8th, having
been nine and a half weeks on shipboard.

the story of those nine weeks is simply, but graphically, told in the
diary sent back to herrnhut. scarcely had they lifted anchor when the
moravians began to arrange their days, that they might not be idly
wasted. in herrnhut it was customary to divide the twenty-four hours
among several members of the church, so that night and day a continuous
stream of prayer and praise arose to the throne of god, and the same
plan was now adopted, with the understanding that when sea-sickness
overtook the company, and they were weak and ill, no time limit should
be fixed for the devotions of any, but one man should pass the duty to
another as circumstances required!

other arrangements are recorded later, when, having grown accustomed to
ship life, they sought additional means of grace. in the early morning,
before the other passengers were up, the moravians gathered on deck to
hold a service of prayer; in the afternoon much time was given to bible
reading; and in the evening hymns were sung that bore on the text that
had been given in the morning. spangenberg, toeltschig, and seifert, in
the order named, were the recognized leaders of the party, but realizing
that men might journey together, and live together, and still know each
other only superficially, it was agreed that each of the ten in turn
should on successive days speak to every one of his brethren face to
face and heart to heart. that there might be no confusion, two were
appointed to bring the food to the company at regular times, and see
that it was properly served, the following being the daily allowance
of provisions to the passengers on board the two brothers, captain
william thomson, for the town of savannah in georgia.

on the four beef-days in each week for every mess of five heads
(computing a head 12 years old, and under 12 two for one, and under 7
three for one, and under 2 not computed), 4 lbs. of beef and 2-1/2 lbs.
of flour, and 1/2 lb. of plums.

on the two pork days in each week for said mess, 5 lbs. of pork and
2-1/2 pints of peas.

and on the fish day in each week for said mess, 2-1/2 lbs. of fish and
1/2 lb. of butter.

the whole at 16 ounces to the pound.

and allow each head 7 lbs. of bread, of 14 ounces to the pound, by the
week.

and 3 pints of beer, and 2 quarts of water (whereof one of the quarts
for drinking), each head by the day for the space of a month.

and a gallon of water (whereof two quarts for drinking) each head, by
the day after, during their being on their passage.

another moravian was chosen as nurse of the company, although it
happened at least once that he was incapacitated, for every man in the
party was sick except spangenberg, who was a capital sailor, and not
affected by rough weather. his endurance was severely tested too, for
while the breeze at times was so light that they unitedly prayed for
wind, thinking that the sea was not their proper element, for from the
earth god had made them, and on the earth he had work for them to do,
 at other times storms broke upon them and waves swept the decks, filling
them with awe, though not with fear. the wind was high, the waves
great, we were happy that we have a saviour who would never show us
malice; especially were we full of joy that we had a witness in our
hearts that it was for a pure purpose we sailed to georgia,--so runs
the quaint record of one tempestuous day.

a more poetic expression of the same thought is given by spangenberg in
a poem written during the voyage, and sent home to david nitschmann to
be set to the music of some danish melody known to them both. there is
a beauty of rhythm in the original which the english cannot reproduce,
as though the writer had caught the cadence of the waves, on some bright
day when the ship went softly after a season of heavy storm.

     gute liebe, deine triebe
      zuenden unsre triebe an,
     dir zu leben, dir zu geben,
      was ein mensch dir geben kann;
     denn dein leben, ist, zu geben
      fried und segen aus der hoeh.
     und das kraenken zu versenken
      in die ungeheure see.

     herr wir waren von den schaaren
      deiner schaeflein abgetrennt;
     und wir liefen zu den tiefen,
      da das schwefelfeuer brennt,
     und dein herze brach vor schmerze,
      ueber unsern jammerstand;
     o wie liefst du!  o wie riefst du!
      bist du uns zu dir gewandt.

     als die klarheit deiner wahrheit
      unsern ganzen geist durchgoss,
     und von deinen liebesscheinen
      unser ganzes herz zerfloss,
     o wie regte und bewegte
      dieses deine liebesbrust,
     uns zu hegen und zu pflegen,
      bis zur suessen himmelslust.

     dein erbarmen wird uns armen,
      alle tage wieder neu,
     mit was suessen liebeskuessen
      zeigst du deine muttertreu.
     o wie heilig und wie treulich
      leitest du dein eigentum;
     o der gnaden dass wir maden
      werden deine kron und ruhm.

     wir empfehlen unsre seelen
      deinem aug und herz und hand,
     denn wir werden nur auf erden
      wallen nach dem vaterland.
     o gieb gnade auf dem pfade,
      der zum reich durch leiden fuehrt,
     ohn verweilen fortzueilen
      bis uns deine krone ziert.

     unser wille bleibe stille
      wenn es noch so widrig geht;
     lass nur brausen, wueten, sausen,
      was von nord und osten weht.
     lass nur stuermen, lass sich tuermen
      alle fluthen aus dem see,
     du erblickest und erquickest
      deine kinder aus der hoeh.

     (love divine, may thy sweet power
      lead us all for thee to live,
     and with willing hearts to give thee
      what to thee a man can give;
     for from heaven thou dost give us
      peace and blessing, full and free,
     and our miseries dost bury
      in the vast, unfathomed sea.

     lord, our wayward steps had led us
      far from thy safe-guarded fold,
     as we hastened toward the darkness
      where the sulphurous vapors rolled;
     and thy kind heart throbbed with pity,
      our distress and woe to see,
     thou didst hasten, thou didst call us,
      till we turned our steps to thee.

     as thy truths convincing clearness
      filled our spirits from above,
     and our stubborn hearts were melted
      by the fervor of thy love,
     o thy loving heart was moved
      us thy righteous laws to teach,
     us to guide, protect and cherish
      till thy heaven we should reach.

     without merit we, yet mercy
      each returning day doth bless
     with the tokens of thy goodness,
      pledges of thy faithfulness.
     o how surely and securely
      dost thou lead and guard thine own;
     o what wonderous grace that mortals
      may add lustre to thy throne.

     in our souls we feel the presence
      of thine eye and heart and hand,
     as we here on earth as pilgrims
      journey toward the fatherland.
     o give grace, that on the pathway,
      which through trial leads to heaven,
     without faltering we may hasten
      till to each thy crown is given.

     though our path be set with danger
      nothing shall our spirits shake,
     winds may rage and roar and whistle,
      storms from north and east may break,
     waves may roll and leap and thunder
      on a dark and threatening sea,
     thou dost ever watch thy children,
      and their strength and peace wilt be.)


before the vessel sailed the trustees had followed up their request to
spangenberg by requiring the forty swiss emigrants to promise submission
to his authority, and consequently numerous efforts were made to be of
service to them. it was disappointing work, in a way, for attempts to
give them religious instruction were met with utter indifference, but
their material needs were many. there was a great deal of sickness among
them, and four died, being buried hastily, and without ceremony. the
moravians themselves were not exempt, several being dangerously ill at
times, even spangenberg was prostrated, from having, he supposed, stayed
too long on deck in the night air, tempted thereto by the beauty of a
calm night in a southern latitude. but having work to do among the swiss
on the following day, he roused himself, and soon became better. two of
the moravians were appointed nurses for the sick swiss, and by the use
of the medicine provided by the trustees, supplemented by unwearying
personal attention, they were made as comfortable as possible.

nor were the crew forgotten. from the day when the moravians helped
lift the anchor as they sailed from the coast of dover, they busied
themselves in the work of the ship, always obliging, always helpful,
until the sailors came to trust them absolutely, even with the keys to
their lockers. when the cook was suddenly taken sick they nursed him
carefully, and then appointed two of their number to carry wood and
water for him until his strength returned, and it is no wonder that such
accommodating passengers were well regarded.

captain thomson was disposed to favor them, but when they realized that
they were receiving a larger share of food and drink than went to the
swiss, they courteously declined, fearing it would breed jealousy.
his kindly feeling, however, continued, and when toeltschig was ill he
brought a freshly killed fowl from which to make nourishing broth, and
on another occasion, after a severe attack of sea-sickness, they all
derived much benefit from some strong beer which he urged upon them.

there were a few cabin passengers on the ship, and on one occasion
spangenberg was invited to dine with them, but their light jesting was
distasteful to him, and the acquaintance was not pursued.


  making a start.

the vessel entered the savannah river, april 6th, and the captain,
taking spangenberg and toeltschig into his small boat, went ahead to
the town of savannah, the capital of georgia, now the home of about six
hundred people. spangenberg had a letter of introduction to mr. causton,
who received him and his companion in a friendly fashion, entertained
them at supper, and kept them over night. mr. causton was one of the
three magistrates charged with all civil and criminal jurisdiction
in savannah, and his position as keeper of the store, from which all
provisions promised by the trustees were dispensed, gave him such
additional power that he was really the dictator of savannah, ruling
so absolutely that the people finally rebelled, and in 1738 secured his
dismissal from office. on his return to england in 1739, he found great
difficulty in trying to explain his accounts to the trustees, was sent
back to georgia to procure some needed papers, died on the passage
over, and was buried in the ocean. his treatment of the moravians was
characteristic, for he was courtesy itself to the new-comers who had
money to spend, inconsiderate when hard times came, deaf to appeals for
settlement of certain vexing questions, and harsh when their wills were
opposed to his.

the next morning, before sunrise, spangenberg and toeltschig went apart
into the woods, fell upon their knees, and thanked the lord that he had
brought them hither in safety. the day was spent in gaining information
as to the customs of the place, mr. causton again claiming them as his
guests at dinner, and in the evening they accepted the invitation of a
merchant to supper. as they ate, the report of a cannon announced the
arrival of their vessel, and toeltschig went to spend the night aboard,
spangenberg remaining on shore to push the preparation for the reception
of the company.

early on the following morning, april 8th, he had their town lots
assigned, (nos. 3 and 4 second tything, anson ward), in order that their
baggage might be brought directly to their own property, for he had
found that lodgings in the town were very dear, and decided that a small
cabin should be built at once and a house as soon as possible. going
then to the ship he guided the company to their new home, and the entire
day was consumed in moving their belongings to the town, as it was some
distance, and everything had to be carried by hand to the little hut
which was hastily erected and roofed over with sacking. evening came
before they had really finished the arrangement of their possessions,
but before they prepared and shared their evening meal, they humbly
knelt and thanked god for his mercies, discussed the bible text for the
day, and joined in several familiar hymns. a new york merchant stopped
and asked them to sing one of his favorites, which was done, and an
indian who had joined them near the river and followed them home, stayed
through the service, and at parting beckoned them to come and visit him.
despite their fatigue, the hourly intercession was observed throughout
the night, their slumbers rendered more peaceful by the knowledge that
one and another in turn was watching and praying beside them.

on the following day two more indians visited the moravians. their faces
were adorned with streaks of red paint, and they seemed very friendly,
rejoiced over the gift of two pewter mugs, and on leaving made signs
that some one should go with them, an invitation that could not then be
accepted.

the 10th of april, the first sunday in america, spangenberg attended
service in the english church, and heard a sermon on the text, be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, well fitted to be the
watchword of the moravian settlers in the trials that were before them.

no unpleasant presentiments, however, troubled them, as they went busily
about their work during the next weeks. mr. causton was very pleasant
to them, selling them provisions at cost, offering them credit at the
store, and promising spangenberg a list of such indian words as he had
been able to learn and write down. he also introduced him to tomochichi,
the indian chief, and to john musgrove, who had a successful trading
house near the town. musgrove had married mary, an indian princess of
the uchees, who had great influence with all the neighboring tribes. at
a later time, through the machinations of her third husband, she made
much trouble in georgia, but during the earlier years of the colony
she was the true friend of the white settlers, frequently acting as
interpreter in their conferences with the indians, and doing much to
make and keep the bond of peace between the two races.

on the 11th of april the five acre garden belonging to spangenberg
was surveyed, and work was immediately begun there, as it was just the
season for planting corn. nine days later nitschmanns garden was laid
out aside of spangenbergs. by the 14th the cabin on spangenbergs town
lot was finished. it was twenty feet long, ten feet wide, and fourteen
feet high, with a little loft where they slept, their goods, with a
table and benches being in the room below. at daybreak they rose, sang a
hymn, and prayed together, breakfasted at eight oclock, the daily text
being read aloud, then worked until half past eleven, when they dined
and read the bible. more work, an evening prayer service, and such
conference as was needed that each might engage in the next days labor
to the best advantage, prepared them for their well-earned repose.

with this simple program steadily carried out, much was accomplished.
a fence was built around a small kitchen-garden on their town property,
and a chicken-yard was enclosed, while the neighbors came to look on and
opine that the moravians had done more in a week than their people in
two years. as the gardens (the five acre lots) lay at some distance
from savannah, a hut was built there, to serve as a shelter against sun
and rain, a heavy storm having chased them home one day soon after their
arrival.

either from the noonday heat, or other conditions to which they were not
yet acclimated, gotthard demuth and george haberland became seriously
ill, causing spangenberg much anxiety, for he did not feel at liberty to
send for a physician, as they could not afford to pay for medicine.
so resort was had to bleeding, then an approved practice, and to such
medicine as remained from their voyage, and rose was fortunate enough
to shoot a grouse, which gave them some much needed palatable meat and
broth. perhaps the most serious case was gottfried haberechts, who
suffered for several days with fever resulting from a cut on his leg.
finally oak-leaves were heated and bound about the limb, which induced
free perspiration and quickly relieved him, so that he was able to
return to work!

a day was appointed on which spangenberg and several others were to ride
out into the country to select the five hundred acre tract granted
to count zinzendorf, and the additional two hundred acres which the
trustees had promised to hold in reserve, and grant to the counts
servants whenever he should request it, but there was rumor of a raid
by hostile indians, under spanish influence, so the expedition had to be
postponed, with the promise, however, that it should be made as soon as
possible.

by the close of the third week in georgia the invalids were better, and
matters were in such a shape that the moravians resolved that on each
saturday work should stop early, and every sunday should be a real day
of rest. as an immediate beginning, they on saturday evening united in
a lovefeast, where we recalled much loving-kindness which god has shown
us hitherto; toeltschig washed the feet of the brethren; we remained
together until very late, and were truly blessed.


  aim and attainment.

when the first company left herrnhut for london and the new world,
they took with them count zinzendorfs formal instructions for the
conduct of their affairs:

i shall not attempt to tell you what you are to do from day to day. i
know that in many ways love will lead you, prepare the way, and point
out your path. i shall only bid you remember the principles and customs
of our congregation, in which, if you stand fast, you will do well. your
one aim will be to establish a little place near the heathen where you
may gather together the dispersed in israel, patiently win back the
wayward, and instruct the heathen tribes.

you have and will ask nothing more than the opportunity to attain this
end through your own labors, but you will request free transportation
for yourselves and those who will follow you,--if they receive your
present small number the lord will send you more.

if you should be tempted to injure any work of the lord for my
sake, refrain from doing it, remembering that i am under a gracious
guardianship which nothing can disturb.

you will take absolutely no part in the spangenberg-halle controversy;
you know the mind of the congregation regarding it. if you find people
prejudiced against you leave it to him who has bidden you go to georgia.
enter into no disputes, but, if questions are asked, give the history of
the congregation, being careful not to censure our opposers, and saying,
which is true, that the congregation at herrnhut gives them little
heed. entire freedom of conscience must be granted you, but there may be
points which you can yield without injuring the cause of christ,--if so
you will find them in due time.

you must live alone, establishing your own little corner, where your
customs will irritate no one; and as soon as you are settled an ordained
minister will be sent you, out of consideration for the scruples of
the salzburgers, although our brethren in other colonies are served by
laymen, as permitted by our ancient constitution.

god willing, i shall soon follow you, and only wait until he opens
the way for me. our dear elder (spangenberg) will quickly return from
america, and in his absence i commit you to the mighty grace of god.

                         your brother and servant,
                                   lewis count v. zinzendorf.

at this time one of the elders at herrnhut. november 27th, 1734.

  he everywhere hath way,
  and all things serve his might, etc.

that these sensible and liberal instructions were not fully carried out
is at once apparent, especially in the two points of free transportation
and settlement in a quiet, secluded spot. the inability of the trustees
to grant their request for the first, burdened the moravian colonists
with what was, under the circumstances, a heavy debt, while the location
of zinzendorfs five hundred acre tract was responsible for their
failure in attaining the second.

when gen. oglethorpe planned the fortifications and defense of savannah
in 1733, he decided to erect a small fort on the ogeechee river, some
miles south, in order to command one of the trails by which the
indians had been accustomed to invade carolina. this fort argyle was
garrisoned with a detachment of rangers, and ten families were sent from
savannah to cultivate the adjacent land. the tract selected in london
for count zinzendorf, was to lie on the ogeechee, near fort argyle, an
excellent place from which to reach the indians in times of peace, but
the worst possible location for noncombatants when war was threatening.

spangenberg urged the survey of the five hundred acre tract as often
and as strongly as he dared, but from various causes, chiefly rumors
of indian incursions, the expedition was deferred until aug. 22nd, when
spangenberg, toeltschig, riedel, seifert, rose, michael haberland, and
mr. johnson, the trustees surveyor, prepared to start on their toilsome
journey, going by boat, instead of attempting to follow the circuitous,
ill-marked road across the country, impassable to pedestrians, though
used to some extent by horsemen.

at one oclock in the morning of aug. 23rd the seven men embarked,
taking advantage of the ebbing tide, and made their way down the
savannah river. it was very dark, the moravians were unaccustomed to
rowing, and mr. johnson, who steered, went to sleep time after time, so
when they accidentally came across a ship riding at anchor they decided
to stay by her and wait for the day. when dawn broke they hastened on
to thunderbolt, where a fort had been built, and some good land cleared,
and there they found two indians, who claimed to know the country, and
agreed to go with them as pilots. toward evening they reached seituah*,
where a stockade was being built as a protection against the indians,
and the night was spent with a captain wargessen (ferguson), who, with
several soldiers, was out in a scout boat watching the movements of the
indians and spaniards in that neighborhood.


     * on skidaway island, exact site unknown.--

the next day they made their way among the islands until they reached
the mouth of the ogeechee, up which they turned, but night overtook
them, and they were forced to drop their anchor. the indians had been
left behind somewhere, and with the return of day it became necessary to
retrace their course for some hours in order to learn where they were.
that night was spent at sterlings bluff, with the scotch who had
settled upon it, and the next morning they proceeded to fort argyle. as
they rowed up the river, a bear left one of the islands, and swam across
to the main land. he was better to us than we to him, for peter shot
at him twice when he came near us, but he left us in peace and went his
way!

the following morning spangenberg and johnson, accompanied by the
lieutenant from fort argyle and several of his rangers, rode out to
inspect the land selected for the moravians. the horses were accustomed
to service against the indians, and went at full gallop, pausing not for
winding paths or fallen trees, and the university-bred man of germany
expected momentarily to have his neck broken, but nothing happened, and
after looking over the tract they returned to fort argyle.

despite the exertions of the morning spangenberg then manned his boat,
and started up the river to visit an indian town, where he hoped to
find tomochichi. much floating timber rendered the trip dangerous and
tedious, and it was not until early sunday morning that they reached
their destination, only to find the place deserted, as the band had
left a few days before for a hunting expedition, and, if fortune
favored them, for a brush with the spanish indians, with whom they had
a perpetual feud. soon johnson appeared, guided by some of the rangers,
who, after a hearty meal with the moravians, returned to the fort,
johnson remaining behind.

monday morning, august 29th, before the sun rose, the party repaired
to the moravian tract, which johnson surveyed, the moravians acting as
chain-carriers. spangenberg was much pleased with the tract. it had a
half mile frontage on the ogeechee, extended two miles back into the
forest, and gave a good variety of land, some low and damp for the
cultivation of rice, sandy soil covered with grass for pasturage, and
dry uplands suitable for corn and vegetables. a rapid stream furnished
an abundance of pure water, and site for a mill, while the thick growth
of timber guaranteed a supply of material for houses and boats. near the
river rose a high hill, where it had once been the intention to build a
fort, and a house had really been erected. this the indians burned,
and later another site had been chosen for fort argyle, but the place
retained the name of old fort, and the hill would serve as the
location for the moravian dwelling.

indian tribes which were friendly to the english lived at no great
distance, and the trail to savannah and ebenezer led directly by old
fort, while the opening of two roads would bring both those towns within
a four hours ride of the settlement.

well content, therefore, with their new acquisition, the moravians
returned to fort argyle, whence johnson rode back to savannah, leaving
them to follow with the boat. at the mouth of the ogeechee they
encountered a severe storm, against which they could make little
headway, try as they would. their anchor was too light to hold against
the current, and there was a marsh on one bank and rocks on the other,
but at last, after night-fall, in the face of a terrific thunder storm,
they forced their way to a place where they could land, and where they
passed the rest of the night, enduring as best they could the heavy
rain, and the attack of insects, against neither of which they were
able to protect themselves. this place takes its
name,--rotten-possum,--from an animal frequently found here, which
they call a possum. i am told that it has a double belly, and that
if pursued it puts its young into one belly, runs up a tree until it
reaches a limb, springs out on that until it is among the leaves, and
then lays itself across the branch with one belly on each side, and
so hides itself, and saves its life! the rest of the journey was
uneventful, and on friday morning, september 2nd, they reached savannah,
having been absent ten days.

it seems a great pity that the moravians were unable to establish
themselves on this tract, where their industry would soon have made an
oasis in the wilderness, but one thing after the other interfered, and
the second company which arrived early in the following year, found
them still at savannah.

in savannah matters moved toward a fair degree of prosperity for the
moravians. about four acres of spangenbergs garden were cleared in time
for the first summers crop of corn, which yielded them sixty bushels.
they also raised some beans, which came to maturity at a time when
provisions and funds were very low, so helping them greatly.

the two farm lots were laid out during the summer, spangenberg assisting
with the survey. by the close of the year twenty-six acres had been
cleared,--on the uplands this meant the felling of trees, and gradual
removal of stumps as time permitted, but on the rice lands it meant far
more. the great reeds, ten to twelve feet high, grew so thick that a man
could scarcely set foot between them, and in cutting them down it was
necessary to go knee-deep below the surface of the ground, and then
the roots were so intertwined that it was difficult to pull them out.

every acre of land that was cleared and planted had to be securely
fenced in, for cattle roamed in the woods, and ruined unprotected crops.
indeed, the colonists in georgia derived little benefit from their
cattle, which ran at large, and when a few were wanted for beef or for
domestic purposes, they were hunted and driven in. the moravians had
to wait until midsummer before they could get their allotment, and then
they received a cow and calf, six hogs and five pigs, with the promise
of more. before the others came the cows had again escaped to the woods,
and the swine had been drowned!

in july spangenberg wrote to herrnhut that he had given his fifty
acres of land, including the town lot, to the moravian congregation at
savannah, and that he would at once apply to the trustees to vest the
title in that body, and if he left georgia before this was accomplished
he would give a full power of attorney to toeltschig. from the first his
land had been used as the common property of the party, and he desired
that the nine men, who, with him, were bound to the repayment of the 60
pounds, borrowed from the trustees, should have the use of it until
that obligation was met, and then it should be used as the savannah
congregation thought best.

nitschmanns land seems to have been held in a different way, although
granted at the same time, and under similar circumstances. july 11th,
spangenberg sent him a detailed description of the town and garden lots,
explaining the advantages and difficulties of cultivation, suggesting
several methods by which it could be done, and giving the approximate
cost, urging that instructions be sent as to his wishes. later he wrote
that the company had decided not to wait for nitschmanns reply, but to
clear the garden on the terms usual in georgia, e.g., that the man who
cleared a piece of ground held it rent free for seven years, when it
reverted to the owner. this had been done, and the garden was ready to
plant and fence, and if nitschmann approved they intended to clear the
farm, and would build a small house on the town lot. zinzendorf had
suggested that negroes be employed on nitschmanns land, but at that
time slavery was prohibited in georgia, and any negroes who ran away
from carolina were at once returned to their masters.

the two farms lay side by side about four miles from savannah, the
gardens, also adjoining, were about two miles from town, so it was
necessary to build cabins at both places, as shelters from sun and
storm, which the settlers found equally trying. two additional cabins
had been built in savannah on spangenbergs lot, and by the end of the
year a house, thirty-four by eighteen feet in size, was under roof,
though not yet finished. this gave an abundance of room, not only
for themselves, but for the second company to whose arrival they were
looking forward with such eagerness.

when this reinforcement came they hoped to move to zinzendorfs tract,
and then, as soon as they could be spared, demuth, haberecht, waschke
and the two haberlands wished to claim the twenty acres apiece which the
trustees had promised to the counts servants. riedel was of the same
mind, but he did not live to see the arrival of the second company. some
months after reaching georgia, he was dangerously ill with fever, but
passed the crisis successfully, and recovered his full strength. he was
one of the party who went to survey zinzendorfs tract, but was taken
sick again three days after the boat left savannah, and by the time they
returned he was obliged to go to bed, and soon became delirious. the
other moravians were greatly distressed, but could do nothing except
nurse him carefully and pray for him earnestly, and toward the end his
mind cleared, though his body had lost the power to recuperate. he died
on the 30th of september, the first moravian to fall asleep in the
united states, though others had given up their lives for the mission
work in the west indies. his spiritual condition had at times caused
much concern to toeltschig, who was especially charged with the
religious welfare of the first company, many of whom had been under his
care in germany, but in the main he had been an earnest man, a willing
and industrious partaker in the common toil, and his death caused much
regret. the burial customs in savannah included the ringing of bells,
a funeral sermon, and a volley of musketry, but learning that these
ceremonies were not obligatory the moravians declined the offer of the
citizens to so honor their brother, and laid him to rest in the savannah
cemetery with a simple service of hymns and prayer.

as they were robing riedel for his burial, a young man came to the
door, and asked if he could not make them some pewter spoons. in
the conversations that followed it developed that he was a native of
switzerland, the son of a physician, and after his fathers death he
had sailed for pennsylvania, intending there to begin the practice of
medicine. but his fellow-passengers stole his books and everything he
had, he was unable to pay for his transportation, and forced to sell his
service for seven years as a redemptioner. at the end of five years he
had become quite ill, and his master, having waited six months for his
recovery, heartlessly turned him out, to live or die as the case might
be. instead of dying, his strength returned, and then his former master
demanded 10 pounds pennsylvania currency, for his unexpired term,
although only 5 pounds had been paid for him, and he had served five
years. the young man was obliged to promise to pay this, and spangenberg
encouraged him to push his spoon-making, in order to do it as speedily
as possible. meanwhile the moravians were so much pleased with his
appearance and speech, that they agreed to receive him into their
company for as long as he chose to stay, and john regnier soon became an
important factor in their comfort. spiritually he was somewhat at sea.
at one time he had desired to be a hermit, and then he had drifted from
one sect to another, seeking something which he could not find, but
acquiring a medley of odd customs. spangenberg advised him to turn his
thoughts from men to god, learning from him what was better and higher,
faith, love, hope, etc., and under the moravian influence he gradually
laid aside his unwise fancies, giving them encouragement to believe that
he would eventually come into the clearer light, as they knew it.

in material things john regnier was of great assistance, owing to his
ability to turn his hand to almost anything. the shoes of the party were
badly torn, but though they had brought leather and tools from england
none of them knew the cobblers trade. john regnier had never made a
shoe, but he took it up, and soon provided for them all, and then he
mended their clothing, and added new garments. he also showed much
aptitude for nursing, and spangenberg put him in charge of several
cases. a man from a neighboring village sent word that he had severed
an artery and could not check the bleeding, and asked for help. regnier
went to him, and was so successful in his treatment that in two weeks
the man was entirely restored. some one discovered a poor scotchman,
dying with dropsy, lying utterly neglected upon the floor of a miserable
hut, and appeal was made to the moravians to take him and care for him.
they did so, moving him to one of their cabins, where they made him a
bed, and regnier nursed him until death ended his sufferings. another
man had high fever, and no friends, and him also the moravians took,
and cared for, the trustees agent furnishing food and medicine for the
sick, but offering no recompense for the care they received.

indeed, as the months passed by, the moravians established a reputation
for charity and for hospitality. not only had they kept free of dispute
with the salzburgers, but the friendliest relations existed, and the
moravian cabins were always open to them when they came to savannah. nor
were they slow to avail themselves of the kindness. gronau and bolzius
often lodged with them, and others came in groups of nine or ten to
spend the night. during the evening stories would be exchanged as to
their circumstances in the home lands, and their reasons for leaving
there, and then sometimes the hosts would spread hay upon the floor
for their guests, at other times give up their own beds, and themselves
sleep upon the floor.

with their nearer neighbors in savannah, they were also upon cordial
terms, though they found few who cared for religious things. the jews
were particularly courteous to them, inviting spangenberg into their
synagogue, and bringing gifts of meat and fish on several occasions
when help was sorely needed on account of the illness of some of their
number,--for riedel was not the only one who was seriously ill, though
no others died. all the conditions in georgia were so different from
what they were accustomed to in germany that it took them some time
to adapt themselves, and longer to become really acclimated, and they
noticed that the same was true of all new-comers. all of the moravians
were sick in turn, many suffering from frosted feet, probably injured on
the voyage over, but spangenberg, toeltschig, haberecht and demuth were
dangerously ill. nearly all of the medicine brought from europe was
gone, and what they could get in savannah was expensive and they did
not understand how to use it, so they were forced to depend on careful
nursing and simple remedies. turpentine could easily be secured from the
pines, spangenberg found an herb which he took to be camomile, which had
a satisfactory effect, and with the coming of the cooler autumn weather
most of the party recovered their health.

probably the food was partly responsible for their troubles, though
they tried to be careful, and cooked everything thoroughly. rice and
salt-meat were their chief articles of diet, for bread cost so much that
they soon gave it up entirely, substituting cornmeal mush, and butter
was so dear as to be entirely out of the question. during the summer
months which preceded the harvest, they could get neither corn, rice
nor beans at the store, so lived on mush, salt-meat, and the beans they
themselves had planted. fresh meat was a great treat, particularly when
it enabled them to prepare nourishing broth for their sick, and once
rose shot a stag, giving them several good meals, but this happened so
seldom as to do little toward varying the monotony of their fare.

drinking water was held to be responsible for the swollen feet and
nausea from which many of them suffered, so they made a kind of
sassafras beer, which proved palatable and healthful, and used it until
they had become accustomed to the climate, when they were able to drink
the water.

when the moravians came to georgia they brought with them a little ready
money, the gift of english friends, and their cash payments secured
them good credit at the trustees store. other merchants sought their
patronage, but they decided to run an account at one place only, and
thought mr. causton, as the trustees agent, would give them the most
liberal treatment. their hardest time financially, as well as regarding
health, was during the summer, when credit came to be accorded
grudgingly, and finally spangenberg, personally, borrowed 15 pounds
sterling, and applied it on their account, which restored their standing
in mr. caustons eyes. on feb. 8th, 1736, they decided to buy enough
corn, rice and salt-meat to last until harvest, having learned by sad
experience how very dear these necessities were later in the year. very
little work had been done which brought in ready money, for their time
had been fully occupied in building their house and clearing the land,
but all things were prepared for the coming of the second company, with
whose assistance they expected to accomplish much. in february the
two carpenters were engaged to build a house for mr. wagner, a swiss
gentleman who had recently arrived, and rented one of the moravian
cabins temporarily, and this was the beginning of a considerable degree
of activity.

the intercourse of the moravians with the other residents of savannah
was much impeded by their ignorance of the english language, and it
occurred to spangenberg that it might be a good thing to take an english
boy, have him bound to them according to custom, and let them learn
english by having to speak to him. about july a case came to his
knowledge that roused all his sympathies, and at the same time afforded
a good opportunity to try his plan. i have taken a four-year-old
english boy into our family. he was born in charlestown, but somehow
found his way to savannah. his father was hanged, for murder i have
heard, and his mother has married another man, and abandoned the child.
a woman here took charge of him, but treated him most cruelly. once she
became angry with him, took a firebrand, and beat him until half his
body was burned; another time she bound him, and then slashed him with
a knife across the back, and might have injured him still more if a man
had not come by and rescued him. the magistrates then gave him to other
people, but they did not take care of him, and hearing that he was a
bright child, i decided to offer to take him. the magistrates gladly
agreed, and will write to his relatives in charlestown, and if they do
not claim him he will be bound to us. he is already proving useful
to the brethren, as he speaks english to them, and they are rapidly
learning to speak and to understand. i am sending him to an english
school, as i would rather he would not learn german, but being bright he
is learning a good deal of it from the brethren.

on october 31st a widow and her seven-year-old son were received into
their household. the woman was in destitute circumstances, and anxious
to work, so after four weeks trial she was installed as maid, and
promised $14.00 a year wages. she proved to be quiet and industrious,
but not very bright. on dec. 17th another boy, six years old, was taken,
his mother being dead, and his father a day-laborer who could not care
for him.

of the indians the moravians had seen a good deal, but no start had
been made toward teaching them, except that some of their words had been
learned. spangenberg decided that the only way to master their language
would be to go and live among them, and this rose professed himself
willing to do as soon as he could be spared. with tomochichi they
were much pleased. he is a grave, wise man, resembling one of the old
philosophers, though with him it is natural, not acquired. were he among
a hundred indians, all clothed alike, one would point him out and say,
that is the king. when the indians came to the moravian cabins they
were courteously received, and supplied with food and drink, often
remaining as silent listeners at the evening service. in turn their
good will took the form of a gift of grouse or dried venison, which the
moravians gratefully received.

the english were very anxious to keep the friendship of these indians,
on whom much of their safety depended, and when one of the nations came
five or six hundred miles to renew a treaty with them, they planned a
spectacle which would at once please and impress them. all the settlers
were put under arms, and led out to meet them, saluting them with a
volley of musketry. with great pomp they were conducted into the town,
presented with guns, clothing, etc., and then, through an interpreter,
they were assured of the good will and faith of the english, and urged
to be true to the treaty, and protect the settlement against those
indian tribes who were under french and spanish influence.

spangenberg was ordered out with the others, but excused himself on
the ground of weakness from his recent illness, and when the officials
offered to depart from their custom, and allow one of zinzendorfs
servants to take his place, he explained that the moravians did not
understand english, and knew nothing of military manoeuvres. during
the first year the question of military service was not sufficiently
prominent to cause real uneasiness, but spangenberg foresaw trouble,
and wrote to herrnhut, urging that the matter be given serious
consideration.

when the moravians passed through london they had fully explained their
position to gen. oglethorpe, who promised them exemption, but they had
no written order from the trustees to show to the local officials, and
not even a copy of the letter in which reference to the subject was
made. as count zinzendorfs servants nine of them were ineligible, but
spangenberg, as a free-holder, was expected to take part in the weekly
drill, which he quietly refused to do.

all free-holders were likewise expected to take their turn in the
watch, composed of ten men, who patrolled the town by night and day.
spangenberg admitted that the watch was necessary and proper, but
decided that he had better not take a personal share in it, other than
by hiring some one to take his place, which was permitted. as the turn
came every seventeen days, and a man expected fifty cents for day and
one dollar for night duty each time, this was expensive, doubly so
because the officers demanded a substitute for the absent nitschmann
also. twice had spangenberg been before the court, attempting to have
the matter adjusted, but he found that this, like many other things,
could not be settled until gen. oglethorpe came. all men wait for gen.
oglethorpe, it is impossible to describe how they long for him. the
salzburgers especially wished for him, for they did not like the
place where they had settled, and wanted permission to move to a more
favorable location which they had chosen.

on the 14th of february, 1736, capt. thomson arrived, bringing letters
from england, and one to spangenberg announced that the second company
of moravians was on the way and might soon be expected. at three oclock
in the morning of february 17th, the town was roused by the sound of
bells and drums. thinking it meant fire, the moravians rushed out, but
learned that gen. oglethorpes ship had reached tybee, and the people
were awakened to welcome him. full of interest to learn whether the
second company was with him the moravians paused for a hasty meal
before going to meet the ship, when to their great joy bishop nitschmann
appeared before them, and his face was to us as the face of an angel!




chapter iv. reinforcements.



  the second company.

before david nitschmann, the hausmeister, left london, after the
sailing of the first moravian company for georgia, he presented to the
trustees a series of propositions, the acceptance of which would open
the way for a large increase of moravian emigration. the proposals were,
in brief, that the trustees should give credit to the moravians to the
extent of 500 pounds sterling, which, deducting the 60 pounds advanced
to the first company, would provide passage money and a years provision
for fifty-five more of count zinzendorfs servants, the loan to be
repaid, without interest, in five years, and to bear interest at the
usual rate if payment was longer deferred. he also suggested that the
money, when repaid, should be again advanced for a like purpose.

in addition he requested that each man of twenty-one years, or over,
should be granted fifty acres near count zinzendorfs tract.

the trustees were pleased to approve of these proposals, and promised
the desired credit, with the further favor that if the debt was not
paid within five years it should draw interest at eight per cent. only,
instead of ten per cent., the customary rate in south carolina.

during the summer, therefore, a second company prepared to follow the
pioneers to the new world. on the 5th of august, 1735, two parties left
herrnhut, one consisting of three young men, and the other of thirteen
men, women and children, who were joined at leipzig by jonas korte,
who went with them to london. on august 8th, five more persons left
herrnhut, under the leadership of david nitschmann, the bishop, who was
to take the second company to georgia, organize their congregation, and
ordain their pastor.

this david nitschmann, a carpenter by trade, was a companion of david
nitschmann, the hausmeister, and john toeltschig, when they left
moravia in the hope of re-establishing the unitas fratrum, and with them
settled at herrnhut, and became one of the influential members of the
community. when missionaries were to be sent to the danish west indies,
nitschmann and leonard dober went on foot to copenhagen (august 21st,
1732), and sailed from there, nitschmann paying their way by his work
as ships carpenter. by the same handicraft he supported himself and
his companion for four months on the island of st. thomas, where
they preached to the negro slaves, and then, according to previous
arrangement, he left dober to continue the work, and returned to
germany. in 1735, it was decided that bishop jablonski, of berlin,
and bishop sitkovius, of poland, who represented the episcopate of the
ancient unitas fratrum, should consecrate one of the members of the
renewed unitas fratrum at herrnhut, linking the church of the fathers
with that of their descendents, and enabling the latter to send to the
mission field ministers whose ordination could not be questioned by
other denominations, or by the civil authorities. david nitschmann, then
one of the elders at herrnhut, was chosen to receive consecration,
the service being performed, march 13th, by bishop jablonski, with the
written concurrence of bishop sitkovius.

the three parties from herrnhut met at magdeburg on august 13th,
proceeding from there to hamburg by boat, and at altona, the sea-port of
hamburg, they found ten more colonists who had preceded them. here also
they were joined by christian adolph von hermsdorf, who went with them
to georgia as a volunteer. apparently lieutenant hermsdorf wanted the
position of zinzendorfs agent in georgia, for the count wrote to him
on the 19th of august, agreeing that he should go with the moravians, at
their expense, but saying that if he desired office he must first prove
himself worthy of it by service with and for the others, even as the
count had always done. if the reports from georgia justified it, the
count promised to send him proper powers later, and to find a good
opportunity for his wife to follow him. rosina schwarz and her child,
who had come with them to hamburg to meet her husband, returned with him
to their home in holstein; and on account of rosina neuberts serious
illness, she and her husband reluctantly agreed to leave the company,
and wait for another opportunity to go to georgia. in 1742 they
carried out their intention of emigrating to america, though it was to
pennsylvania, and not to georgia.

the second company, therefore, consisted of twenty-five persons:

  david nitschmann, the bishop.
  christian adolph von hermsdorf, a volunteer.
  john andrew dober, a potter.
  david zeisberger.
  david tanneberger, a shoemaker.
  john tanneberger, son of david, a boy of ten years.
  george neisser.
  augustin neisser, a young lad, brother of george.
  henry roscher, a linen-weaver.
  david jag.
  john michael meyer, a tailor.
  jacob frank.
  john martin mack.
  matthias seybold, a farmer.
  gottlieb demuth.
  john boehner, a carpenter.
  matthias boehnisch.
  maria catherine dober, wife of john andrew dober.
  rosina zeisberger, wife of david zeisberger.
  judith toeltschig, catherine riedel, rosina haberecht, regina demuth,
    going to join their husbands already in georgia.
  anna waschke, a widow, to join her son.
  juliana jaeschke, a seamstress.*

    * fifteen of these colonists were originally from moravia
     and bohemia.--

during an enforced stay of three weeks at altona, the moravians
experienced much kindness, especially at the hands of korte and his
family, and mrs. weintraube, the daughter of a mennonite preacher, who
had come from her home in london on a visit to her father. by this time
the moravian settlement at herrnhut was coming to be well and favorably
known in holland, and every visit won new friends, many of whom came
into organic fellowship with them. a few years later, when the unitas
fratrum was confronted by a great financial crisis, it was largely the
loyalty and liberality of the dutch members that enabled it to reach a
position of safety.

on the 9th of september, the company went aboard an english boat,
homeward bound, but contrary winds held them in port until the 13th,
and it was not until sunday, oct. 2nd, that they reached london, after a
long and stormy crossing, which gave many of them their first experience
of sea-sickness.

nitschmann and korte at once went ashore to report their arrival to
secretary verelst, and on monday a house was rented, and the twenty-five
colonists and jonas korte moved into it, to wait for the sailing of gen.
oglethorpes ship, the general having offered them berths on his own
vessel. the general was out of town when they reached london, but called
on monday evening, and showed them every kindness,--oglethorpe is
indeed our good friend, and cares for us like a father.

nitschmann found a good deal of difficulty on account of the language,
for he could not speak latin, as spangenberg had done, and knew no
english, so that all of his conversations with oglethorpe had to be
carried on through an interpreter; nevertheless a number of important
points were fully discussed.

on the question of military service he could reach no definite and
satisfactory conclusion, and thought it a great pity that there had not
been a perfect mutual understanding between zinzendorf and the trustees
before the first company sailed. that zinzendorfs servants should be
free from military service was admitted by all, but oglethorpe thought
three men must be furnished to represent zinzendorf, spangenberg and
nitschmann (the hausmeister), the three free-holders, and suggested that
lieutenant hermsdorf might take one place. nitschmann said that would
not do, that the moravians could not and would not fight, and there
the matter rested. nitschmann wrote to zinzendorf, begging him to come
to london, and interview the trustees, but advised that he wait for
oglethorpes return from georgia some nine months later.

on this account the members of the second company agreed that it would
be better for them not to accept land individually, but to go, as the
others had done, as zinzendorfs servants, to work on his tract.
oglethorpe suggested that an additional five hundred acres should
be requested for count zinzendorfs son, and nitschmann referred the
proposal to the authorities at herrnhut. in regard to the five hundred
acre tract already granted, the general said that it had been located
near the indians, at the moravians request, but that settlers there
would be in no danger, for the indians were at peace with the english,
there was a fort near by, and besides he intended to place a colony of
salzburgers fifty miles further south, when the moravians would be, not
on the border but in the center of georgia.

gen. oglethorpe assured nitschmann that there would be no trouble
regarding the transfer of title to the georgia lands, for while, for
weighty reasons, the grants had been made in tail male, there was no
intention, on the part of the trustees, to use this as a pretext for
regaining the land, and if there was no male heir, a brother, or
failing this, a friend, might take the title. (in 1739 the law entailing
property in georgia was modified to meet this view, and after 1750, all
grants were made in fee simple.) he also explained that the obligation
to plant a certain number of mulberry trees per acre, or forfeit the
land, was intended to spur lazy colonists, and would not be enforced in
the case of the moravians.

nitschmann told gen. oglethorpe of the wives and children who had been
left in herrnhut, and suggested the advisability of establishing an
english school for them, that they might be better fitted for life
in georgia. oglethorpe liked the idea, and, after due consideration,
suggested that some one in herrnhut who spoke french or latin,
preferably the latter, should be named as count zinzendorfs agent, to
handle funds for the english school, and to accompany later companies
of georgia colonists as far as london, his expenses to be paid by the
trustees. of this the trustees approved, and donated 40 pounds sterling,
partly for nitschmanns use in london, and the balance,--about 4 pounds
it proved to be,--for the herrnhut school. an english gentleman also
gave them 32 pounds, with the proviso that within four years they in
turn would give an equal amount to the needy, which nitschmann readily
agreed should be done.

various other gifts must have been received, for when the company
sailed, nitschmann reported to count zinzendorf that, without counting a
considerable amount which korte had generously expended on their behalf,
they had received 115 pounds in london, and had spent 113 pounds. this
will seem much to you, but when you look over the accounts, and consider
the number of people, and how dear everything is, you will understand.
 unfortunately the colonists had left herrnhut without a sufficient
quantity of warm clothing, thinking that it would not be needed, but
letters from georgia gave them quite new ideas of the climate there, and
they were forced to supply themselves in london, though at double what
it would have cost in germany.

in addition to these expenditures, the second company borrowed from the
trustees the funds for their passage to georgia, and a years provision
there, binding themselves jointly and severally to repay the money, the
bond, dated oct. 26th, 1735, being for the sum of 453 pounds 7 shillings
6 pence, double the amount of the actual debt. this included


     passage for 16 men, 8 women and 1 boy,
     25 persons, 24-1/2 heads.            pounds 122: 10: 0
     25 sets of bed-clothes.                         6:  5: 0
     1 years provisions in georgia,
       being 12 bushels indian corn,
       100 lbs. meat, 30 lbs. butter,
       1 bushel salt, 27 lbs. cheese,
       per head.                                    64:  6: 3
     advanced in london for necessaries.            33: 12: 6
                                            -----------------                                            pounds 226: 13: 9

this was to be repaid in five years, drawing eight per cent. interest
after three years, further security to be given within twelve months if
requested by the trustees or their agent; and any provisions not used to
be credited on their account.

in the matter of forming new acquaintances in london, the second company
was far less active than the first had been, spangenbergs standing
and education having given him access to many people, attracting their
attention to his companions. the second company profited by the friends
he had made, mr. wynantz especially devoting himself to their service,
and while nitschmann and his associates did not reach many new people,
they inspired the respect and confidence of those whom spangenberg had
introduced to the moravian church, and so strengthened its cause. a
carpenter from wittenberg, vollmar by name, who was attracted to them,
requested permission to go to georgia with them, although not at their
expense, and to this they agreed. a number of salzburgers who were to
go to georgia with general oglethorpe, though not on the same ship, were
under the leadership of the young baron von reck with whom zinzendorf
had corresponded during the early stages of the moravian negotiations,
and the baron called on the second company several times, offered to
assist them in any way in his power, and expressed the wish that the
moravians and salzburgers could live together in georgia. nitschmann
doubted the wisdom of the plan, but courteously agreed to refer it to
zinzendorf, who, however, refused his sanction.

on the 12th of october, the moravians went aboard gen. oglethorpes
ship, the simmonds, capt. cornish, where they were told to select the
cabins they preferred, being given preference over the english colonists
who were going. the cabins contained bare bunks, which could be closed
when not in use, arranged in groups of five,--three below and two
above,--the five persons occupying them also eating together. the
moravians chose their places in the center of the ship, on either side
of the main mast, where the ventilation was best, and there would be
most fresh air when they reached warmer latitudes. the number of people
on the ship is rather large, for we are altogether one hundred and
fifty who are going to georgia, but besides ourselves they are all
englishmen. many of them are like wild animals, but we have resolved
in all things to act as the children of god, giving offence to no one,
that our purpose be not misconstrued.

after seeing his companions comfortably settled on the vessel,
nitschmann returned to his numerous tasks in london. on the 24th,
he came back to the ship, accompanied by korte, who bade them an
affectionate farewell. by the 27th all of the passengers, including gen.
oglethorpe, were on board, but it was not until the afternoon of october
31st, that the simmonds sailed from gravesend.


  four journals.

on the simmonds, as she sailed slowly down the thames on her way to
georgia, there were four englishmen, with whom the moravians were to
become well acquainted, who were to influence and be influenced by them,
and through whom a great change was to come into the religious history
of england. these were john and charles wesley, benjamin ingham and
charles delamotte. the wesleys were sons of samuel wesley, a clergyman
of the church of england, and while at the university of oxford
they, with two companions, had formed a little society for religious
improvement, and by their strict and methodical habits gained the name
of methodists; both brothers had taken orders in the english church,
and were on their way to georgia, john to serve as rector at savannah,
and charles as gen. oglethorpes private secretary. benjamin ingham was
born in yorkshire, and met the wesleys at oxford, where he joined their
methodist society. he, too, had been ordained in the english church,
and now, at the age of twenty-three, had yielded to john wesleys
persuasions, and agreed to go with him to the indians. charles
delamotte, the son of a london merchant, met the wesleys at the home of
james hutton, shortly before they sailed for georgia, and was so much
impressed by them, and by their object in seeking the new world, that he
decided to leave the world, and give himself up entirely to god, and
go with them.

for the greater part of his life john wesley kept a journal, extracts
from which were given to the public from time to time, and benjamin
inghams account of the voyage to georgia was also printed, so that the
story of those weeks is quite well known. nevertheless, something of
interest may be gained by comparing these two journals with the diaries
kept by david nitschmann, bishop of the moravians, and john andrew
dober, one of the second company.

to avoid confusion it should be noted that the difference of eleven days
in the dates is only apparent, not real, for the englishmen used the
old style calendar, the germans employed the modern one. in 46 b. c. the
roman calendar had gained two months on the actual seasons, and a more
accurate calculation resulted in the adoption of the so-called julian
calendar (prepared at the request of julius caesar), the two missing
months being inserted between november and december in that year of
confusion. by 1582, however, the julian calendar had fallen ten days
behind the seasons, so another calculation was made, and pope gregory
xiii abolished the julian calendar in all catholic countries, dropped
the dates of ten days from that year, and established the reformed, or
gregorian calendar. this was adopted in catholic germany, in 1583, in
protestant germany and holland, in 1700, but in england not until 1752,
by which time the difference had increased to eleven days. following the
ancient jewish custom the year, for many centuries, began with the 25th
of march, but public sentiment came to favor the 1st of january as
the more appropriate date, and it was gradually adopted. in england,
however, the legal year continued to begin with march 25th, until 1752,
although many people were either using the newer fashion, or indicating
both, and a date might be correctly written in four ways, e.g. january
10th, 1734, old style, legal, january 10th, 1734-5, or january 10th,
1735, old style, popular, and january 21st, 1735, new style, the last
agreeing with the calendar now in general use.

bishop nitschmann gives the outline of their religious services on
almost every day, and in the translation which follows these are
generally omitted; in the same way some paragraphs are left out of the
wesley journal. extracts from dobers and inghams journals are inserted
when they give facts not otherwise noted.


====== 24 oct. 1735.

nitschmanns diary. oct. 24th, 1735.

   i went to the ship, (the simmonds, captain cornish).
   my heart rejoiced to be once more with the brethren.
   in the evening we held our song service.

(we have all given ourselves to the lord, and pray that the saviour may
comfort our hearts with joy, and that we may attain our object, namely,
to call the heathen, to become acquainted with those whom we have not
known and who know us not, and to worship the name of the lord.--letter
of oct. 28.)


====== 25 oct. 1735.

john wesleys journal. oct. 14th, 1735, (o. s.) tuesday.

mr. benjamin ingham, of queens college, oxford, mr. charles delamotte,
son of a merchant in london, who had offered himself some days before,
my brother charles wesley, and myself, took boat for gravesend, in order
to embark for georgia. our end in leaving our native country was not to
avoid want, (god having given us plenty of temporal blessings,) nor to
gain the dung or dross of riches or honor; but singly this,--to save our
souls, to live wholly to the glory of god. in the afternoon we found the
simmonds off gravesend, and immediately went on board.

(we had two cabins allotted us in the forecastle; i and mr. delamotte
having the first, and messrs. wesley the other. theirs was made pretty
large, so that we could all meet together to read or pray in it. this
part of the ship was assigned to us by mr. oglethorpe, as being most
convenient for privacy.--inghams journal.)

====== 27 oct. 1735.

nitschmann. oct. 27th.

bled mrs. toeltschig and mrs. zeisberger. on deck one man was knocked
down by another, striking his head on the deck so as to stun him. in the
evening we held our song service at the same hour that the english had
theirs. i spoke with mr. oglethorpe and the two english clergymen, who
asked concerning our ordination and our faith. mr. oglethorpe said he
would be as our father, if we would permit it.

====== 28 oct. 1735.

nitschmann. oct. 28th.

at our prayer-meeting considered eph. 1, how our election may be made
sure; i also wrote to the congregation at herrnhut. mrs. zeisberger was
sick, and mr. oglethorpe concerned himself about her comfort.

----

wesley. oct. 17th.

i began to learn german in order to converse with the germans, six and
twenty* of whom we had on board.

    * twenty-five moravians and the wittenberg carpenter.--

====== 29 oct. 1735.

nitschmann. oct. 29th.

spoke with the wittenberg carpenter concerning his soul.

====== 30 oct. 1735.

nitschmann. oct. 30th.

we decided who should attend to various duties during the voyage,
and held our band meetings. (the bands were small groups, closely
associated for mutual religious improvement.) an english boy fell
overboard, but was rescued by a sailor.

====== 31 oct. 1735.

nitschmann. oct. 31st.

in the afternoon we sailed twelve miles from gravesend.

----

wesley. oct. 20th, monday.

believing the denying ourselves, even in the smallest instances, might,
by the blessing of god, be helpful to us, we wholly left off the use of
flesh and wine, and confined ourselves to vegetable food,--chiefly rice
and biscuit. in the afternoon, david nitschmann, bishop of the germans,
and two others, began to learn english. o may we be, not only of one
tongue, but of one mind and of one heart.

====== 1 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 1st.

the english clergyman began to spend an hour teaching us english. in
the early service we read concerning new life in the soul; the preceding
night was blessed to me, and the saviour was near. at the evening
service we spoke of earnest prayer and its answer.

(david nitschmann, in the presence of all the members, formally
installed certain of our members in office,--david tanneberger as
overseer, dober as teacher and monitor, seybold as nurse for the
brethren, and mrs. dober as nurse for the sisters.--dobers diary.)

(we have arranged that one of us shall watch each night, of which mr.
oglethorpe approves.--letter of oct. 18th.) ----

wesley. oct. 21st.

we sailed from gravesend. when we were past about half the goodwin sands
the wind suddenly failed. had the calm continued till ebb, the ship had
probably been lost. but the gale sprung up again in an hour, and carried
us into the downs.

we now began to be a little regular. our common way of living was this:
from four in the morning till five, each of us used private prayer. from
five to seven we read the bible together, carefully comparing it (that
we might not lean to our own understanding) with the writings of
the earliest ages. at seven we breakfasted. at eight were the public
prayers. from nine to twelve i usually learned german and mr. delamotte
greek. my brother writ sermons, and mr. ingham instructed the children.
at twelve we met to give an account to one another what we had done
since our last meeting, and what we designed to do before our next.
about one we dined. the time from dinner to four, we spent in reading
to those whom each of us had taken in charge, or in speaking to them
severally, as need required. at four were the evening prayers; when
either the second lesson was explained (as it always was in the
morning,) or the children were catechised, and instructed before the
congregation. from five to six we again used private prayer. from six
to seven i read in our cabin to two or three of the passengers, (of whom
there were about eighty english on board), and each of my brethren to a
few more in theirs. at seven i joined with the germans in their public
service; while mr. ingham was reading between the decks to as many
as desired to hear. at eight we met again, to exhort and instruct one
another. between nine and ten we went to bed, where neither the roaring
of the sea, nor the motion of the ship, could take away the refreshing
sleep which god gave us.

====== 2 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 2nd.

we sailed further. in the early prayer service we considered eph. 4, the
unity of the spirit, and the means of preserving the bond of peace. in
the song service many points of doctrine were discussed with the english
clergyman, also the decline and loss of power.

====== 3 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 3rd.

a dense fog and unpleasant weather, so we lay still at anchor.

====== 4 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 4th.

i visited the other ship, (the london merchant, capt. thomas) where
the so-called salzburgers are. i spend most of my time studying english.


----

wesley. oct. 24th.

having a rolling sea, most of the passengers found the effects of it.
mr. delamotte was exceeding sick for several days, mr. ingham for about
half an hour. my brothers head ached much. hitherto it has pleased god
the sea has not disordered me at all.

during our stay in the downs, some or other of us went, as often as we
had opportunity, on board the ship that sailed in company with us, where
also many were glad to join in prayer and hearing the word.

====== 5 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 5th.

we prayed for the congregation at herrnhut, and also that we might be
one with it in spirit. in the evening we spoke of the lords protection,
how good it is.

     there is no room for fear,
      the world may shake and quiver,
     the elements may rage,
      the firmament may shiver,
     we are safe-guarded.

====== 8 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 8th.

an (english) child died, and was buried in the sea at five oclock.

====== 11 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 11th.

the text was the lord is with me, therefore i do not fear.

----

wesley. oct. 31st.

we sailed out of the downs. at eleven at night i was waked by a great
noise. i soon found there was no danger. but the bare apprehension of
it gave me a lively conviction what manner of men those ought to be, who
are every moment on the brink of eternity.

====== 12 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 12th.

(this afternoon we came near portsmouth, and anchored. today dober began
to study english, and learned the lords prayer.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. nov. 1st, saturday.

we came to st. helens harbour, and the next day into cowes road. the
wind was fair, but we waited for the man-of-war which was to sail with
us. this was a happy opportunity of instructing our fellow travellers.
may he whose seed we sow, give it the increase!

====== 13 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 13th.

hermsdorf visits baron von reck.

====== 14 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 14th.

we lay at anchor at cowes on the isle of wight, and some of us landed. i
went with baron von reck to newport, one mile distant, it is a beautiful
place. i conversed with baron von reck about the lords prayer.

====== 18 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 18th.

a great storm. to me the time is precious, and passes too swiftly. it
is as though we were in the midst of wild beasts, which are bound and
cannot harm us. we know the saviour stands by us, and strengthens us
through the holy ghost.

====== 20 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 20th.

one older and two young englishmen were whipped for stealing.

====== 21 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 21st.

conversed with mr. oglethorpe about our ordination, baron von reck
acting as interpreter. he was well pleased when i explained our view,
and that we did not think a bishop must be a great lord as among the
catholics. he offered to give us anything we wished, but i told him we
needed nothing.

====== 23 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 23rd.

the man-of-war [hawk, capt. gascoine) joined us. a boy was beaten, and
sent away from the ship.

====== 25 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 25th.

spoke with mr. oglethorpe about boehner and george neisser, who are sick
and must go ashore for treatment. boehner has a sore arm, and neisser
a sore foot. an english friend gave us a guinea to buy some things we
need.

====== 29 nov. 1735.

nitschmann. nov. 29th.

in the evening i prayed for a good wind, since we do not wish to lie in
one place and be of no use.

====== 1 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 1st.

the wind was good, we thanked god and sailed about eight oclock. not
long after the wind fell, and we anchored, but i could not believe that
we were not to go. the wind rose again, and we sailed nine miles.

----

wesley. nov. 20th.

we fell down yarmouth road, but the next day were forced back to cowes.
during our stay here there were several storms, in one of which two
ships in yarmouth roads were lost.

the continuance of the contrary winds gave my brother an opportunity of
complying with the desire of the minister of cowes, and preaching there
three or four times.

====== 2 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 2nd.

about two oclock we returned to cowes.

====== 3 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 3rd.

the women went ashore to wash our clothes. the others went with them,
because we do not wish to annoy any one, and desired to be alone that we
might celebrate the lords supper. i could not leave the ship, but was
with them in spirit.

====== 4 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 4th.

(nitschmann and dober spoke with several of the brethren concerning
their spiritual condition. in the evening a storm sprang up which
continued most of the night. mr. oglethorpe is ill, which reminds us to
pray for him, and the english preacher, john wesley, has promised to do
the same. this preacher loses no opportunity to be present at our song
service; he spares no pains to perform the duties of his office and he
likes us. we wish we could converse freely with him, so that we could
more carefully explain the way of god to him.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. nov. 23rd, sunday.

at night i was waked by the tossing of the ship, and roaring of the
wind, and plainly showed i was unfit, for i was unwilling to die.

====== 7 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 7th.

a great storm, and we thanked god that we were in a safe harbor.

====== 10 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 10th.

all hands summoned to lift the anchor. mr. oglethorpe called me, took
me by the hand, led me into the cabin, and gave me 1 pound for the
brethren. later the wind was again contrary, and we had to lie still.

====== 18 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 18th.

we lifted the anchor at three oclock, but as we got under sail the wind
changed again. we must stay still, but what the lord intends we do not
know.

----

wesley. dec. 7th, sunday.

finding nature did not require such frequent supplies as we had been
accustomed to, we agreed to leave off suppers; from doing which we have
hitherto found no inconvenience.

====== 21 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 21st.

an east wind sprang up, and with the help of god we sailed at nine
oclock from cowes, where we had been for five weeks and three days.

when we reached the open sea many became sea-sick. there was so much to
be done that we could not hold our prayer-meeting, for our people help
in all the work, and therefore the sailors treat us well, no matter what
they think of us in their hearts. in the evening our song service was
much blessed.

(with us went two ships, the man-of-war, and that which carried baron
von reck and his salzburgers. two of the salzburgers were on shore, and
were left behind when the ship sailed, whereat their wives and children
who were on board, were sorely grieved.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. dec. 10th, wednesday.

we sailed from cowes, and in the afternoon passed the needles. from
this day to the fourteenth being in the bay of biscay, the sea was very
rough. mr. delamotte and others were more sick than ever; mr. ingham a
little; i not at all. but the fourteenth being a calm day, most of the
sick were cured at once.

====== 22 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 22nd.

the wind was east, and we sailed nine miles an hour, but were all very
sea-sick.

====== 23 dec. 1735.

wesley. dec. 12th.

(in the forenoon we left the man-of-war, he not being able to sail as
fast as our ships.--inghams journal.)

====== 25 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 25th.

as this was christmas day we read matt. 8 in our prayer service. the
wind had died down, everyone felt much better, and it was a beautiful
day.

====== 27 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 27th.

at midnight there was a great storm, and the waves broke over the ship;
the middle hatch was open, and the water poured in, running into our
cabin, so that we had to take everything out of them until we could dry
them.

====== 30 dec. 1735.

nitschmann. dec. 30th.

the weather was again pleasant.

----

wesley. dec. 19th.

(messrs. wesley and i, with mr. oglethorpes approbation, undertook to
visit, each of us, a part of the ship, and daily to provide the sick
people with water-gruel, and such other things as were necessary for
them.--inghams journal.)

====== 1 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 1, 1736.

it was new years day, and mr. oglethorpes birthday.

(br. nitschmann asked us to select a number of verses, wrote them out
and presented them as a birthday greeting to mr. oglethorpe. it was a
beautiful day, warm and calm.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. dec. 21st, sunday.

we had fifteen communicants, which was our usual number on sundays.

(this being mr. oglethorpes birthday, he gave a sheep and wine to the
people, which, with the smoothness of the sea, and the serenity of
the sky, so enlivened them that they perfectly recovered from their
sea-sickness.

on christmas day, also, mr. oglethorpe gave a hog and wine to the
people.--inghams journal.)

====== 5 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 5th.

(to-day, according to the old style, christmas was celebrated on our
ship. br. nitschmann spoke on the words, unto us a child is born, unto
us a son is given.--dobers diary.)

====== 9 jan. 1736.

wesley. dec. 29th.

(we are now past the latitude of twenty-five degrees, and are got into
what they call the trade winds, which blow much the same way all the
year round. the air is balmy, soft, and sweet. the ship glides smoothly
and quietly along. the nights are mild and pleasant, being beautifully
adorned with the shining hosts of stars,

  forever singing as they shine,
  the hand that made us is divine.
 --inghams journal.)

====== 10 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 10th.

(we have been running for several days with the trade winds. here
the day is two hours longer than it is in germany at this season. the
sailors wished to adhere to their custom of initiating those who crossed
the tropic of cancer for the first time, but gen. oglethorpe forbade it.
the weak, the children, and the sick, are well cared for, so that
the nine months old child receives an egg and some goats milk every
day.--dobers diary.)

====== 12 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 12th.

to-day, according to the old style, we celebrated the new year.

====== 20 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 20th.

an english clergyman asked us how often we celebrated the lords supper,
saying that he thought it a sacrifice which consecrated and improved the
life. we told him our view; he said he would like to visit herrnhut.

(we re-crossed the tropic of cancer.--dobers diary.)

====== 21 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 21st.

(we are still in the trade wind, and sail swiftly and steadily.)

we cannot thank god enough that we are all well, only mrs. demuth is
always sea-sick when the wind rises.

====== 23 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 23rd.

we saw a ship.

----

wesley. jan. 12th, 1736.

(i began to write out the english dictionary in order to learn the
indian tongue.--inghams journal.)

====== 26 jan. 1736.

wesley. jan. 15th.

complaint being made to mr. oglethorpe of the unequal distribution of
the water among the passengers, he appointed new officers to take charge
of it. at this the old ones and their friends were highly exasperated
against us, to whom they imputed the change. but the fierceness of man
shall turn to thy praise.

====== 27 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 27th.

(as there was little good water left the passengers were given poor
water, but when oglethorpe heard of it, he ordered that all, in the
cabin and outside, should be treated alike, as long as the good water
lasted. mr. oglethorpe and the preacher, john wesley, are very careful
of the passengers welfare; the latter shows himself full of love for
us.--dobers diary.)

====== 28 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 28th.

there was a great storm, the waves went over the ship, and poured into
it. then many who knew not god were frightened, but we were of good
cheer, and trusted in the lord who does all things well. roscher and
mack are good sailors and not afraid of anything.

----

wesley. jan. 17th, saturday.

many people were very impatient at the contrary wind. at seven in the
evening they were quieted by a storm. it rose higher and higher till
nine. about nine the sea broke over us from stem to stern; burst through
the windows of the state cabin, where three or four of us were, and
covered us all over, though a bureau sheltered me from the main shock.
about eleven i lay down in the great cabin, and in a short time fell
asleep, though very uncertain whether i should wake alive, and much
ashamed of my unwillingness to die. o how pure in heart must he be, who
would rejoice to appear before god at a moments warning! toward morning
he rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm.

====== 29 jan. 1736.

nitschmann. jan. 29th.

we read the 13th chapter of mark at our early prayer service. the
weather was a little better, but the wind was contrary. we also saw
a ship which was sailing northeast. in the evening we read the
ninety-eighth psalm, the lord was with us and we were blessed.

----

wesley. jan. 18th, sunday.

we returned thanks to god for our deliverance, of which a few appeared
duly sensible. but the rest (among whom were most of the sailors) denied
we had been in any danger. i could not have believed that so little good
would have been done by the terror they were in before. but it cannot be
that they should long obey god from fear, who are deaf to the motives of
love.

====== 1 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 1st.

the weather was fine, and there was no wind until ten oclock, when
it came from the right quarter. in addition to our usual allowance the
captain sent us fresh meat, which he has done thrice already, and we do
not altogether like it, for we are content with what we have, and do not
desire more.

====== 3 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 3rd.

there was a great storm, which lasted all night.

----

wesley. jan. 23rd, friday.

in the evening another storm began. in the morning it increased, so that
they were forced to let the ship drive. i could not but say to myself,
how is it that thou hast no faith? being still unwilling to die. about
one in the afternoon, almost as soon as i had stepped out of the great
cabin door, the sea did not break as usual, but came with a smooth
full tide over the side of the ship. i was vaulted over with water in a
moment, and so stunned, that i scarce expected to lift up my head again,
till the sea should give up her dead. but thanks be to god, i received
no hurt at all. about noon our third storm began.

====== 4 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 4th.

the storm lasted all day, and the waves often swept over the ship. the
storm rudder was lashed fast, and so we were driven.

====== 5 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 5th.

in the early morning we had a fairly good breeze, but about ten oclock,
a storm rose, of such violence that the wind seemed to blow from all
four quarters at once, and we were in danger of being overpowered. the
waves were like mountains; the rudder was lashed fast, only one sail was
spread, and we drove on, only the lord knew whither. but we did not let
it prevent us from holding our song service. the text given to us was
psalm 115:14, which assured us that we were blessed of god,--may he ever
bless us more and more. during the service the ship was covered with a
great wave, which poured in upon us, and on the deck there was a great
cry that the wind had split the one sail which was spread. there was
great fright among the people who have no god; the english clergyman was
much aroused, ran to them, and preached repentance, saying among other
things that they could now see the difference. i was content, for our
lives are in gods hands, and he does what he will; among us there was
no fear, for the lord helped us.

(there was a terrible storm which lasted till midnight. during the song
service a great wave struck the ship with a noise like the roar of a
cannon. the wind tore the strong new sail in two; the people, especially
the english women, screamed and wept; the preacher wesley, who is always
with us in our song service, cried out against the english, now man can
see who has a god, and who has none. during the last eight days we have
had so much contrary wind, and so many storms that we could not approach
the land, though we were near it several times.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. jan. 25th, sunday.

at noon our third storm began. at four it was more violent than before.
the winds roared round about us, and whistled as distinctly as if it had
been a human voice. the ship not only rocked to and fro with the utmost
violence, but shook and jarred with so unequal, grating, a motion, that
one could not but with great difficulty keep ones hold of anything, nor
stand a moment without it. every ten minutes came a shock against the
stern or side of the ship, which one would think should dash the planks
to pieces.

we spent two or three hours after prayers, in conversing suitably to the
occasion, confirming one another in a calm submission to the wise, holy,
gracious will of god. and now a storm did not appear so terrible as
before. blessed be the god of all consolation!

at seven i went to the germans; i had long before observed the great
seriousness of their behaviour. of their humility they had given a
continual proof, by performing those servile offices for the other
passengers, which none of the english would undertake; for which they
desired, and would receive no pay, saying it was good for their proud
hearts, and their loving saviour had done more for them. and every
day had given them occasion of showing a meekness, which no injury could
move. if they were pushed, struck, or thrown down, they rose again and
went away; but no complaint was found in their mouth. there was now an
opportunity of trying whether they were delivered from the spirit of
fear, as well as from that of pride, anger, and revenge. in the midst of
the psalm wherewith their service began, the sea broke over, split the
mainsail in pieces, covered the ship, and poured in between the decks,
as if the great deep had already swallowed us up. a terrible screaming
began among the english. the germans calmly sung on. i asked one of
them afterward, were you not afraid? he answered, i thank god, no. i
asked, but were not your women and children afraid? he replied mildly,
no; our women and children are not afraid to die.

from them i went to their crying, trembling neighbors, and pointed out
to them the difference in the hour of trial, between him that feareth
god, and him that feareth him not. at twelve the wind fell. this was the
most glorious day which i have hitherto seen.

====== 6 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 6th.

(the oldest sailors say they have never seen so fierce a storm as the
one we had last night. the wind came from all sides at once, lifted the
water from the sea, bore it through the air and cast it on the other
ship, where baron von reck and the salzburgers were, and so flooded it
that twelve persons were kept at the pumps all night.--dobers diary.)


----

wesley. jan. 26th.

we enjoyed the calm. i can conceive no difference comparable to that
between a smooth and a rough sea, except that which is between a mind
calmed by the love of god, and one torn up by the storms of earthly
passion.

====== 8 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 8th.

(there was a calm, and very fine weather, so that a boat could be
lowered to visit the other ship.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. jan. 28th.

(being a calm day, i went on board the other ship, read prayers, and
visited the people. at my return i acquainted mr. oglethorpe with their
state, and he sent them such things as they needed.--inghams journal.)

====== 9 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 9th.

(the wind was again favorable to us, but there was much
lightning.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. jan. 29th.

about seven in the evening we fell in with the skirts of a hurricane.
the rain as well as the wind was extremely violent. the sky was so dark
in a moment, that the sailors could not so much as see the ropes, or
set about furling the sails. the ship must, in all probability, have
overset, had not the wind fell as suddenly as it rose.

====== 10 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 10th.

the whole day was stormy, and all night the waves broke over the ship.


----

wesley. jan. 30th.

we had another storm, which did us no other harm than splitting the
foresail. our bed being wet, i laid me down on the floor and slept sound
till morning.

====== 12 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 12th.

(we were obliged to drift, because we did not know how far we were from
land. about noon we sighted three ships, sailed toward them, and saw
they were english; our sailors lowered the boat, we wrote in haste, and
sent letters to herrnhut. the ships came from charlestown, and told us
we were thirty hours run from georgia.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. feb. 1st, sunday.

(three sails appearing, we made up toward them, and got what letters we
could write, in hopes some of them might be bound for england. one of
them, that was bound for london, made towards us, and we put our letters
on board her.--inghams journal.)

====== 13 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 13th.

to-day we had another storm, and twice saw the ocean not far from us,
drawn up like smoke, so that the water reached up to the clouds, and the
ship would have been in great danger if it had struck us.

====== 14 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 14th.

soundings toward evening showed twenty-eight fathoms of water, and we
hope to see land to-morrow.

====== 15 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 15th.

about two oclock we saw land. i climbed the mast, and poured out my
heart to god, thanking him, and praying that he would care for us in our
new home. we anchored for the night.

----

wesley. feb. 4th, wednesday.

about noon the trees were visible from the mast, and in the afternoon
from the main deck. in the evening lesson were these words, a great
door, and effectual, is opened, o let no one shut it!

====== 16 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 16th.

it was a beautiful day, and the land looked very fair. at two oclock
we reached tybee, and were all very happy. the song service was blessed,
and we thanked god with prayer and praise.

----

wesley. feb. 5th.

between two and three in the afternoon god brought us all safe into the
savannah river. we cast anchor near tybee island, where the grove of
pines, running along the shore, made an agreeable prospect, showing, as
it were, the bloom of spring in the depths of winter.

====== 17 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 17th.

i went on shore with mr. oglethorpe, and we together fell on our knees
and thanked god, and then took a boat to savannah. i went at once to the
brethren, and we rejoiced to meet again. i found the brethren well, and
looked with wonder at what they had accomplished, went with toeltschig
and spangenberg to the garden, and also received letters from herrnhut.
spangenberg had to go immediately to mr. oglethorpe to discuss many
things with him.

----

wesley. feb. 6th, friday.

about eight in the morning we first set foot on american ground. it was
a small, uninhabited island, (peeper island), over against tybee. mr.
oglethorpe led us to a rising ground, where we all kneeled down to give
thanks. he then took boat for savannah. when the rest of the people were
come on shore, we called our little flock together to prayers. several
parts of the second lesson (mark 6) were wonderfully suited to the
occasion.

====== 18 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 18th.

(about six oclock in the evening, br. spangenberg came from savannah to
us, which made us very glad and thankful. he told us of the death of br.
riedel, and held the song service, praying and thanking god for having
brought us together again.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. feb. 7th.

mr. oglethorpe returned from savannah with mr. spangenberg, one of the
pastors of the germans. i soon found what spirit he was of; and asked
his advice with regard to my own conduct.

====== 19 & 20 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 19th and 20th.

(we waited for the small vessel that was to come for us. br. spangenberg
held the prayer and song services.--dobers diary.)

----

wesley. feb. 9th.

i asked mr. spangenberg many questions, both concerning himself and the
church at herrnhut.

====== 21 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 21st.

(the small vessel came; we had much rain, and the wind was so strong
against us that we had to spend the night on the transport.--dobers
diary.)

====== 22 feb. 1736.

nitschmann. feb. 22nd.

(in the afternoon we reached savannah, where we were lodged in the house
which the brethren who came a year ago have built in the town. the
lord has done all things well, and has turned to our good all that has
befallen us, even when we did not understand his way, and has laid his
blessing upon our journey,--thanks be unto him.--dobers diary.)

====== 27 feb. 1736.

wesley. feb. 16th.

mr. oglethorpe set out for the new settlement on the altamahaw river.
he took with him fifty men, besides mr. ingham, mr. hermsdorf, and three
indians.

====== 6 mar. 1736.

wesley. feb. 24th, tuesday.

mr. oglethorpe returned. the day following i took my leave of most of
the passengers of the ship. in the evening i went to savannah.

======


  organization.

the arrival of the second company was a marked event in the eyes
of the moravians already settled at savannah. hitherto all had been
preparation, and labor had seemed less arduous and privations less
severe because they were smoothing the path for those who were to
follow, and it was with well-earned satisfaction that wives and friends
were lodged in the new house, taken to the garden and the farm, and
introduced to acquaintances in the town. no doubt poor catherine
riedels heart ached with loneliness, and her tears flowed fast, when,
at the close of that long and stormy voyage, she heard of her husbands
death, and stood beside his grave in the savannah cemetery;--but there
was little time for grieving in the press of matters that required
attention, for spangenbergs long visit was now to end, nitschmann was
to remain only until the organization of the congregation was complete,
and there was much to be done before these two able leaders took their
departure.

scarcely had bishop nitschmann greeted the members of the first
company in the dawn of feb. 17th, 1736, when spangenberg and toeltschig
took him to the garden two miles distant, that they might have a private
and undisturbed conference. all too soon, however, word was brought
that gen. oglethorpe wanted to see spangenberg at once, so they retraced
their steps, and spangenberg received a hearty greeting from the
general, and many compliments on what he and his party had accomplished.
there is no record of the conversations among the moravians on that day,
but they are not difficult to imagine, for the news from home and from
the mission fields on the one side, and the problems and prospects in
georgia on the other, would furnish topics which many days could not
exhaust.

that evening spangenberg again called on gen. oglethorpe, who gave
orders that a boat should take him next day to tybee, where the ship
lay at anchor, with all her passengers aboard. he also told spangenberg
about the english preacher whom he had brought over, and made inquiries
about nitschmanns position, asking that the explanation be repeated to
the english preacher, who was also interested in him.

the following day spangenberg waited upon gen. oglethorpe to ask about
hermsdorf, as he heard the general had promised to take him to the
altamaha, where a new town was to be built. he also begged oglethorpe
to help him arrange his departure for pennsylvania as soon as possible,
which the general agreed to do.

about six oclock that evening spangenberg reached the ship at tybee,
and was warmly welcomed by the moravians, and at their song service he
met the much-talked-of english preacher, john wesley. the two men liked
each other at the first glance; wesley wrote in his journal, i soon
found what spirit he was of, and asked his advice in regard to my
own conduct, while spangenberg paralleled this in his diary with the
remark, he told me how it was with him, and i saw that true grace dwelt
in and governed him.

during the two days which elapsed before the transport came to take
the moravians from the ship, wesley and spangenberg had several long
conversations, each recording the points that struck him most, but
without comment. these discussions regarding doctrine and practice
were renewed at intervals during the remainder of spangenbergs stay
in savannah, and the young englishman showed himself eager to learn the
indian language so that he might preach to the natives, generous in his
offers to share his advantages of study with the moravians, and above
all determined to enforce the letter of the ecclesiastical law, as he
understood it, in his new parish. he thought it would be well if two of
the moravian women would dedicate themselves to the indian service, and
at once begin to study the language, and as the early church employed
deaconesses, it would be profitable if these women were ordained to
their office. he was also convinced that the apostolic custom of
baptism by immersion ought to be observed in georgia. he bound himself
to no sect, but took the ground that a man ought to study the bible
and the writings of the church fathers of the first three centuries,
accepting what agreed with these two sources, and rejecting all else.
 he requested the moravians to use the lords prayer at all their public
services, since this is acknowledged to have been the custom of the
early church, and since that early church celebrated the holy communion
every day, he thought it necessary that all members should partake at
least on every sunday. he also had his thoughts concerning fast days.
 spangenberg promised to lay these matters before the congregation, but
so far as fast days were concerned, he said that while he would observe
them as a matter of conscience if he belonged to a church which required
them, he doubted the wisdom of forcing them upon a church in which they
were not obligatory.

on the 21st, the periagua (so they call a rather deep, large boat)
came to take the moravians to savannah, but it was necessary to call
at the other ship, as some of their baggage had been brought in that
vessel. spangenberg went ahead, and found that for some reason the
baggage could not be taken off that day. he was pleasantly received by
the younger reck, but the baron was absent, having gone to see the
site to which the salzburgers wished to move their settlement, gen.
oglethorpe having given his permission. about the time the periagua
arrived, a heavy rain came up, and fearing the effect on the new-comers,
spangenberg obtained permission to take them into the cabin. when ten
oclock came they decided to wait no longer, and started for savannah,
with the result that they spent the entire night in the rain, in an
open boat, and then had passed but half way up the river! early in the
morning spangenberg took two men and his small boat and went ahead,
stopping at capt. thomsons ship to get some things korte had sent them
from london. they reached savannah in the afternoon, and before daybreak
on thursday, feb. 23rd, the periagua at last landed its passengers at
savannah.

that evening spangenberg returned with oglethorpe to the ship, that
various important matters might be more fully discussed. they agreed,
(1) that the five hundred acres already surveyed for zinzendorf
should be retained, and settled, but that it would be wise to take an
additional five hundred acres of more fertile land nearer savannah,
where it would be more accessible, the grant to be made to christian
ludwig von zinzendorf, the counts eldest son; (2) that no moravian
could accept a fifty acre tract without pledging himself to military
service, but land could be secured for a number of them at the rate
of twenty acres apiece, without this obligation. this land could be
selected near zinzendorfs estate, the town to be built on the counts
property. if any wished to leave the moravian congregation, he should
receive twenty acres elsewhere for himself. (3) non-moravians, like john
regnier, might live with them on the same conditions. (4) if one of
the moravians died without male issue, the congregation should name his
successor in the title to the land. (5) the promised cattle should still
be given.

it was further arranged that spangenberg should continue to hold the
title to his fifty acres, but with the understanding that it was in
trust for the congregation; the same to apply to nitschmanns land, if
desired.

on the 25th and 26th, a number of indians visited the ship, being
received with much ceremony. king tomochichi, and others, spangenberg
had often seen, and they were formally presented to mr. wesley, of whom
they had heard, and to whom they gave a flask of honey and a flask of
milk, with the wish that the great word might be to them as milk and
honey. tomochichi told of his efforts to keep peace among the tribes,
in the face of rumors that the english meant to enslave them all, and
of his success so far, but he feared the indians were not in a frame
of mind to give much heed to the gospel message. still he welcomed
the attempt, and would give what aid he could, advising that the
missionaries learn the indian tongue, and that they should not
baptize,--as the spanish did,--until the people were instructed and
truly converted.

on feb. 27th, general oglethorpe started for the altamaha. his journey
to georgia on this occasion had been principally to protect the southern
borders of the colony by establishing two new towns on the frontier, and
erecting several forts near by. one company, which sailed direct
from scotland, had landed in january, and begun a settlement at new
inverness, on the north bank of the altamaha, and a second was now to
be established on st. simon island, and was to be called frederica.
oglethorpe had expected to take the salzburgers who came on the london
merchant, to the southward with him, but nearly all of them decided
that they preferred to join those of their number who were preparing to
move to new ebenezer, and the general did not insist, contenting himself
with his english soldiers.

a periagua had been started a little in advance of the sloop which bore
the provisions, arms, ammunition, and tools, and in the evening gen.
oglethorpe followed in a swift, ten-oared boat, called,--from the
service in which it was often employed,--a scout boat.

with the general went mr. ingham, and lieut. hermsdorf. the latter
assured spangenberg that he had really meant little more than to
compliment the general on the occasion when he remarked that he would
ask nothing better than to follow him through bush and valley, and see
him carry out his wise designs, that he did not know at that time that
oglethorpe was going to the altamaha, nor how far away the altamaha was.
but spangenberg gravely told him that gen. oglethorpe had taken his
word as that of an honest man, and that he would not attempt to hold him
back, only he wished him to so demean himself as to bring credit and
not shame to zinzendorf and the moravians, to whom he was at liberty to
return when he desired. hermsdorf, therefore, went with oglethorpe and
his fifty men, was made a captain and was given a position of importance
in superintending the erection of the necessary fortifications on st.
simon.

benjamin inghams visit to frederica proved to be his first unpleasant
experience in the new world. like john wesley, he came with the
strictest ideas of sabbath observance, etc., and as one said, in answer
to a reproof, these were new laws in america. the effect may be summed
up in his own words: my chief business was daily to visit the people,
to take care of those that were sick, and to supply them with the best
things we had. for a few days at the first, i had everybodys good word;
but when they found i watched narrowly over them, and reproved them
sharply for their faults, immediately the scene changed. instead of
blessing, came cursing, and my love and kindness were repaid with hatred
and ill-will.

oglethorpe remained on the altamaha but a few days, and then returned
to savannah for the rest of his colonists. meanwhile the moravian
congregation was being fully organized. during spangenbergs visit to
oglethorpe on his vessel, the moravians, including bishop nitschmann,
met together, and john toeltschig was elected manager (vorsteher),
gottfried haberecht, monitor (ermahner), and gotthard demuth to perform
various minor duties (diener). the name of the nurse (krankenwaerter) is
not given, but he was probably john regnier, who acted as physician, not
only for the moravians, but for many of their poorer neighbors. andrew
dober was associated with toeltschig in the management of the finances,
and all of these men were solemnly inducted into office, it being the
custom to give a kind of specialized ordination even for positions not
commonly considered ministerial.

three bands were formed among the men,--smaller companies associated
for religious improvement, each band electing a leader charged with
special oversight of the members. there was one among the married men,
one among the unmarried men who were communicants, and another for
the unmarried non-communicants, toeltschig, seifert and rose being the
leaders. the women were organized in like manner, though being few in
number there was probably but one band among them, under mrs. toeltschig
who had been appointed elderess before leaving herrnhut. there is no
reference to the celebration of the holy communion by the first company
during their months of preparation in savannah, nor had opportunity been
given to the second company since they left the english coast, but now,
with bishop nitschmann to preside, they were able to partake together,
finding much blessing therein. they resolved in the future to commune
every two weeks, but soon formed the habit, perhaps under wesleys
influence, of coming to the lords table every sunday.

when spangenberg returned to them, a conference was held each evening,
and on sunday they had a lovefeast, especially for those who had been
selected to superintend the material and spiritual affairs of the
congregation.

on the 1st of march, john and charles wesley called on them, and on
the 6th, charles wesley came again, and opened his heart to them.
the diary calls him an awakened but flighty man, who had come as gov.
oglethorpes secretary, and was now about to go to frederica as pastor
of that turbulent flock. from him spangenberg learned of oglethorpes
return from altamaha, and accompanied by nitschmann went with him to
the ship, where the wesleys were still living. two days were spent with
oglethorpe, who promised to give them ground containing a good bed of
clay, where they could make brick, which should be sold to the trustees
agent at 15 shillings per 1,000, two-thirds of the price to be applied
on their debt, and one-third to be paid them in cash. moreover several
english boys should be apprenticed to them to learn the trade. hemp
and flax seed should also be given them, and he urged them to weave the
linen, for they had men who understood the art, and cloth was scarce and
dear in georgia. he also advised them to buy oxen to use in cultivating
their land; and said that they should have one-third of the grape-vines
he had brought over with him, another portion was to be given to
tomochichi, the remainder to be planted in his own garden.

on the 8th, spangenberg and nitschmann returned to savannah, and
with andrew dober and john wesley, (who had now moved from the ship,)
proceeded up the river to mrs. musgroves, about five miles distant.
wesley wished to select a site for a small house, which oglethorpe had
promised to build for him, where he and his companions might live while
they were studying the indian language, under mrs. musgroves direction.
nitschmann wanted to visit and talk with the indian king, tomochichi,
and dober was trying to find some clay suitable for pottery. the
following day they returned to savannah, and mr. wesley and mr.
delamotte took up their abode with the moravians, as mr. quincy,
wesleys predecessor in the savannah pastorate, had not yet vacated
his house. wesley writes, we had now an opportunity, day by day, of
observing their whole behaviour. for we were in one room with them from
morning to night, unless for the little time i spent in walking. they
were always employed, always cheerful themselves, and in good humor with
one another; they had put away all anger, and strife, and wrath, and
bitterness, and clamor, and evil speaking; they walked worthy of the
vocation wherewith they were called, and adorned the gospel of our lord
in all things. the impression thus made upon john wesley was lasting,
and even during the subsequent years in england, when differences of
every kind arose between him and the moravians, and his journal is full
of bitter denunciations of doctrines and practices which he did not
understand, and with which he was not in sympathy, he now and again
interrupts himself to declare, i can not speak of them but with tender
affection, were it only for the benefits i have received from them.

an event which occurred on march 10th, is of more than local interest,
in that it is the first unquestioned instance of the exercise of
episcopal functions in the united states. prior to this, and for
a number of years later, clergymen of the church of england, and
english-speaking catholic priests, were ordained in the old world,
before coming to the new, remaining under the control of the bishop and
of the vicar apostolic of london, while the spanish catholics were under
the suffragan of santiago de cuba, and the french catholics under the
bishop of quebec. tradition mentions the secret consecration of two
bishops of pennsylvania before this time, but its authenticity is
doubted, and the two men did not exercise any episcopal powers.
therefore when bishop nitschmann came to georgia, and in the presence of
the moravian congregation at savannah ordained one of their number to be
their pastor, he was unconsciously doing one of the first things which
are so interesting to every lover of history.

whenever it was possible the moravians spent saturday afternoon and
evening in rest, prayer, and conference, and on this occasion four
services were held at short intervals.

at the first service the singing of a hymn was followed by the reading
of psalm 84, a discourse thereon, and prayer. the second was devoted to
reading letters from germany, and some discussion as to hermsdorf and
his relation to the congregation. the third service was the important
one, and the following account was recorded in the diary. when we
re-assembled the question: must not our congregation have a chief elder
(aeltester)? was presented for discussion. all thought it necessary,
and were unanimous in their choice of anton seifert, and no other was
even suggested. while his name was being considered, he was sent from
the room, and when he had been recalled, we sang a hymn, and nitschmann
and toeltschig led the congregation in most earnest prayer. then
nitschmann delivered an earnest charge, setting before him the
importance of his office, which made him the foremost member of the
congregation, especially in times of danger, for in the early church,
as well as among our forefathers in moravia, the bishops were ever the
first victims. he was asked if he would freely and willingly give up his
life for the congregation and the lord jesus. he answered, yes. then
he was reminded of the evil which arose when bishops, seeing their power
in a congregation, began to exalt themselves, and to make outward show
of their pre-eminence. he was asked whether he would recognize as evil,
abjure, and at once suppress any inclination he might feel toward pride
in his position as chief elder, and his larger authority. he answered
with a grave and thoughtful yes. then our nitschmann prayed over him
earnestly, and ordained him to his office with the laying on of hands.
nitschmann was uncommonly aroused and happy, but anton seifert was
very humble and quiet. john wesley, who was present, wrote the great
simplicity, as well as solemnity, of the whole, almost made me forget
the seventeen hundred years between, and imagine myself in one of those
assemblies where form and state were not; but paul the tent-maker, or
peter the fisherman, presided; yet with the demonstration of the spirit
and of power.

both wesley and benjamin ingham refer to seifert as a bishop, which is
a mistake, though a natural one. wesley was present at the ordination,
and heard the charge, with example and warning drawn from the actions
of earlier bishops; while ingham, in the course of several long
conversations with toeltschig concerning the moravian episcopate and
seiferts ordination, asked is anton a bishop? and was answered,
yes, for our congregation. this was in view of the fact that bishop
nitschmann, in ordaining seifert, had empowered him to delegate another
member to hold the communion, baptize, or perform the marriage ceremony
in case of his sickness or necessary absence. at that time the moravian
church was just beginning to form her own ministry, the ranks of deacon,
presbyter and bishop were not fully organized, and the definite system
was only established by the tenth general synod of the church in 1745.
the exigencies of the case required large powers for a man serving in an
isolated field, and they were given him, but strictly speaking, seifert
was only ordained a deacon, and never was consecrated bishop.

the fourth and last service of the day was given up to song, a
discourse, and prayer.

on sunday, march 11th, after morning prayers, wesley went to tybee for
an interview with general oglethorpe. at a general gathering of the
moravians later in the day, the second chapter of acts was read, with
special reference to the last four verses, and the description of the
first congregation of christs followers, when all that believed were
together, and had all things common, was taken as the pattern of their
gemeinschaft. this plan, which had already been tested during the
first year, proved so advantageous that it was later adopted by other
american moravian settlements, being largely responsible for their rapid
growth during their early years, though in each case there came a time
when it hindered further progress, and was therefore abandoned. in
religious matters, the organization of the savannah congregation had
been modeled after that at herrnhut, so far as possible, but in material
things the circumstances were very different. at herrnhut the estates of
count zinzendorf, under the able supervision of the countess, were made
to pay practically all the general church expenses, and many of the
members were in the service of the saxon nobleman, nicholas lewis, count
zinzendorf, in various humble positions, even while in the church he
divested himself of his rank and fraternized with them as social
equals. but the men who emigrated to georgia had undertaken to support
themselves and carry on a mission work, and spangenberg, with his keen
insight, grasped the idea that a common purpose warranted a community
of service, the labor of all for the benefit of all, with every duty,
no matter how menial, done as unto the lord, whom they all, in varying
degrees, acknowledged as their master. later, in bethlehem, pa., with
a larger number of colonists, and wider interests to be subserved,
spangenberg again introduced the plan, and elaborated it into a more
or less intricate system, which is described in a clear and interesting
manner in a history of bethlehem, by rt. rev. j. mortimer levering,
which has recently been published.

not only on account of its successor the oeconomie, at bethlehem,
and others copied therefrom, but in view of the various modern attempts
which have been and are still being made to demonstrate that the action
of the early church at jerusalem can be duplicated and made financially
successful, it is worth while to rescue the resolutions of the moravian
congregation at savannah from the oblivion of the manuscript diary, in
which they have been so long concealed, noting the claim that this was
the first time since apostolic days, that a congregation had formed
itself into such a society,--a gemeinschaft.

in our gathering we read acts 2, and spoke of the gemeinschaft,
for we are planning to work, to sow and reap, and to suffer with one
another. this will be very useful, for many a man who has not understood
or exerted himself, will by this means see himself and be led to
improve. others also will see from it that we love each other, and will
glorify the father in heaven. there has been no society like that at
jerusalem, but at this present time it becomes necessary, for material
reasons. were we only individuals all would fear to give one of us
credit, for they would think, he might die, but nothing will be denied
the society, for each stands for the other. each member must work
diligently, since he does not labor for himself alone but for his
brethren, and this will prevent much laziness. no one must rely on the
fact that he understands a handicraft, and so on, for there is a curse
on him who relies on human skill and forgets the divine power. no one
will be pressed to give to the society any property which has hitherto
belonged to him.--each person present was asked if he had any remarks
to make, but there were no objections raised. moreover the brethren were
told that if one should fall so low that he not only withdrew himself
from the brethren, but was guilty of gross sin, he would be forced
to work for another master until he had earned enough to pay his
transportation here and back again, for we would not willingly permit
such a man to remain in the land as an offence to the indians.

it is interesting to observe that care for the poor indians is the
argument given for the course to be pursued in dealing with a recreant
member! they had come to preach the gospel to the indians, and did not
propose that evil should be learned through fault of theirs.

at his earnest request, john regnier was now admitted to the society,
his presence among them so far having been without distinct agreement
as to his standing. this did not make him a communicant member of the
church, simply put him on a par with the other non-communicants, of whom
there were quite a number in the congregation.

in the evening anton seifert, so recently ordained chief elder,
or pastor, of the congregation, officiated for the first time at a
confirmation service, the candidate being jacob frank. he had been in
poor health when the second company left germany, and count zinzendorf
had advised him not to go, but his heart was set on it, and he would not
be persuaded. he grew worse during the voyage and was now very ill with
dropsy, but in such a beautiful christian spirit that no one could deny
his wish for full membership in the church. having given satisfactory
answers to the searching questions put to him, the blessing was laid
upon his head, and he expressed so great a desire to partake of the
lords supper that his request was immediately granted, the elders and
helpers (helfer) communing with him. two or three days later he asked
spangenberg to write his will, and then his strength gradually failed,
until on march 19th, he passed to the lord, leaving to his associates
the remembrance of his willing and happy departure.

the term helpers was used to express in a general way all those, both
men and women, who were charged with the spiritual and temporal affairs
of the congregation. many of the words employed as official titles
by the moravians were given a specialized significance which makes it
difficult to find an exact english equivalent for them, though they are
always apt when the meaning is understood. perhaps the best example of
this is diener, which means servant, according to the dictionary,
and was used to designate those who served the congregation in various
ways. until quite recently a lovefeast, held annually in salem, n. c.,
for members of church boards, sunday-school teachers, church choir,
ushers, etc. was familiarly known as the servants lovefeast, a direct
inheritance from the earlier days. it is now more commonly called the
workers lovefeast, an attempt to unite helper and diener in a term
understood by all.

at a helpers conference held on march 13th, it was decided to have
nothing more to do with vollmar, the wittenberg carpenter, who had
crossed with the second company, had proved false and malicious, and had
now joined herr von recks party without the consent of the moravians.
more important, however, than the vollmar affair, was the proposed
departure of spangenberg for pennsylvania. most faithfully had he
fulfilled his commission to take the first company of moravians to
georgia, and settle them there, patiently had he labored for and with
them during their days of greatest toil and privation, controlling his
own desire to keep his promise and go to the schwenkfelders, who were
complaining with some bitterness of his broken faith; but now his task
was ended, the savannah congregation was ready to be thrown on its
own resources, gen. oglethorpe had provided him with letters of
introduction, and the lot said, let him go, for the lord is with
him.

final questions were asked and answered, spangenbergs commission was
delivered to him, and then bishop nitschmann laid his blessing upon
 him. in the lutheran church, to which he belonged before he joined the
moravians, spangenberg had been an accredited minister of the gospel.
the church of england refused to acknowledge the validity of lutheran
ordination, because that church had no episcopate, but the moravians,
influenced by count zinzendorf, himself a lutheran by birth,
broad-minded, liberal, and devout, did not hesitate to fraternize with
the lutherans, or even to accept the sacraments at the hands of pastor
rothe, in charge of the parish church of berthelsdorf. at the same time
they prized the episcopate lately transferred to them from the ancient
unitas fratrum, and while continuing in free fellowship with christians
of all denominational names, they now intended to so ordain their own
ministry that no church could question it. when the three grades were
established in 1745, a license to preach granted by the lutheran church
was considered equivalent to the rank of deacon, ordination in the
moravian church making the minister a presbyter.

now fully equipped for his mission to the english colony of
pennsylvania, spangenberg left savannah on march 15th, going on capt.
dunbars ship to port royal, where he lodged with a man who was born in
europe, his wife in africa, their child in asia, and they were all
now living in america! from port royal he went by land almost to
charlestown, the last short distance being in a chance boat, and
from charlestown he sailed to new york. from there he proceeded
to philadelphia, and to the schwenkfelders, making his home with
christopher wiegner on his farm in the skippack woods, where george
boehnisch was also living. spangenberg worked on the farm that he might
not be a burden to his host, and might meet the neighbors in a familiar
way, meanwhile making numerous acquaintances, and gaining much valuable
information.

bishop nitschmann remained in savannah until march 26th, when he sailed
to charlestown. there he was detained ten days waiting for a
northbound ship, and employed the time in delivering several letters
of introduction, and learning all he could about carolina, and the
conditions there. on the 28th of april he reached new york, and left
on the 9th of may for philadelphia, going partly by boat, and partly
on foot, reaching there on the 13th. six weeks he and spangenberg spent
together, visiting many neighborhoods, and informing themselves as to
the religious and material outlook in pennsylvania, and then nitschmann
sailed for germany.

his report gave a new turn to the american plans, for both he and
spangenberg were much pleased with pennsylvania. quite a number of the
settlers seemed open to the idea of mutual aid in the spiritual life,
material conditions were very different from those in georgia and better
suited to the moravian needs, the quaker governor was not likely to
force military service upon people who held the same theories as himself
in regard to warfare, and there were large tribes of indians within easy
reach, to whom the gospel might be preached. as troubles thickened in
savannah, therefore, the heads of the church at herrnhut began to look
toward pennsylvania, and ultimately sent thither the larger companies
originally destined for georgia.

in august, spangenberg went to visit the moravian mission on the island
of st. thomas, returning to pennsylvania in november, where he remained
until the following year.




chapter v. the second year in georgia.



  the english clergymen.

the same day that bishop nitschmann left savannah, john wesley moved
into the parsonage which had just been vacated by his predecessor, mr.
quincy. a week earlier he had entered upon his ministry at savannah,
being met by so large and attentive an audience that he was much
encouraged, and began with zeal to perform his pastoral duties. he was
the third rector of the savannah parish, the rev. henry herbert having
been the first, and he preached in a rude chapel built on the lot
reserved for a house of worship in the original plan of savannah,--the
site of the present christ church.

the first word of discouragement was brought by ingham, who returned
from frederica on april 10th, with a message from charles wesley begging
his brother to come to his relief. he told a woeful story of persecution
by the settlers, and injustice from oglethorpe to charles wesley, all
undeserved, as oglethorpe freely admitted when he threw off the weight
of suspicion laid upon his mind by malicious slanderers, and sought
an interview with his young secretary, in which much was explained and
forgiven. but poor charles was in great straits when he sent ingham to
savannah, sick, slighted, and abused, deprived even of the necessaries
of life, and so cast down that on one occasion he exclaimed, thanks
be to god, it is not yet made a capital offence to give me a morsel of
bread!

wesley obeyed the summons, taking delamotte with him, ingham caring for
the church and delamottes school during their absence. there were poor
school facilities in savannah prior to delamottes arrival, and he at
once saw the need, and devoted himself to it. delamotte seems to have
been a quiet man, who took little share in the aggressive work of his
companions, and consequently escaped the abuse which was heaped upon
them.

on april 22nd, ingham sent an invitation to toeltschig to visit him, and
this was the beginning of a close personal friendship which lasted for
the rest of their lives, and of such a constant intercourse between
ingham and the moravian church, that he is often supposed to have become
a member of it, though he really never severed his connection with the
church of england. toeltschig speaks of him as a very young man, about
24 or 25 years of age, who has many good impulses in his soul, and is
much awakened. he had come to georgia for the sole purpose of bearing
the gospel message to the indians, and it was through him that the
moravians were finally able to begin their missionary work.

when wesley and delamotte returned from frederica, the former resumed
his association with the moravians, continuing to join in their sunday
evening service, and translating some of their hymns into english.

in may two questions were asked of toeltschig, upon the answering of
which there depended more than any one imagined. the diary says,--the
20th, was sunday.--mr. ingham asked if we could not recognize and
receive him as our brother; to which i replied, that he did not know us
well enough, nor we him, we must first understand each other better. on
the 21st, mr. wesley spoke with me, and asked me the selfsame question.
i said to him that we had seen much of him day by day, and that it was
true that he loved us and we loved him, but that we did not so quickly
admit any one into our congregation. then at his request toeltschig
outlined the moravian view of conversion, and the requisites for
church-membership.

a few days later charles wesley unexpectedly returned from frederica,
and oglethorpe sent word that either john wesley or ingham should come
down in his place. the latter was by no means anxious to go,--his former
experience had not been agreeable, but the reason he gave the moravians
was that a number of indian traders were soon to visit savannah, and
he was very anxious to see them. they advised him to be guided by john
wesleys wish, which he agreed to do, and then found that wesley had
decided to go himself.

during the weeks that followed, ingham and charles wesley were
frequently with toeltschig, who answered as best he could their many
questions regarding the history of the moravian episcopate, a matter
of vital importance to a strict member of the church of england who was
thinking of allying himself with them. everything they heard confirmed
ingham in his intention, and when john wesley returned in july he
and ingham again made application to be received as brethren in our
congregation, and to go with us to the lords table. we entirely refused
to admit them into the congregation, and i (toeltschig) gave them the
reasons therefor: (1) that we did not know them well enough; (2) and
that they perhaps did not know us well enough, both things which we
considered highly important; and (3) that their circumstances and
situation were such that it would be difficult if not impossible for
them to comply with the requirements of such admission. the promises
expected from a confirmand,--to which they also must have bound
themselves,--are thus summarized. to give body and soul to the lord now
and forever; to devote and dedicate himself to the service of the unity,
according to the grace and gifts bestowed on him by the saviour; and
willingly to submit to the discipline and regulations which the unity
has established for the welfare and improvement of souls. could these
two men, in the zeal and vigor of their youth, honestly have made
these promises, the moravian church would have gained two invaluable
co-workers, but they seem to have accepted toeltschigs argument as
conclusive, and dropped the matter, with no ill-will or disturbance of
the existing pleasant relations.

concerning the communion we assured them that we loved them, and would
welcome them as honored guests at the lords supper, for we believed
that they loved the lord. this invitation, however, the young clergymen
would not accept.

on the 6th of august, charles wesley left for england, bearing
dispatches to the trustees, and with the hope of interesting others in
the evangelizing of the indians. he meant himself to return to georgia,
but feeble health prevented, and he resigned his office as secretary to
gen. oglethorpe the following may. his brother john accompanied him to
charlestown, and then went to frederica to deliver certain letters to
gen. oglethorpe. he found there was less and less prospect of doing
good at frederica, many there being extremely zealous, and indefatigably
diligent to prevent it, his opposers even attempting personal violence.
one lady tried to shoot him, and when he seized her hands and took
away her pistol, she maliciously bit a great piece out of his arm. still
he made two more visits to the place, and then in utter despair of
doing good there, took his final leave of frederica.


  work among the indians.

when the moravians adopted the conversion of the indians as their main
object for settling in america, they were greatly influenced by the
attractive descriptions of the wild people which were being published.
in a report, ascribed to gen. oglethorpe, it is stated that nothing
is lacking for their conversion to the christian faith except a
knowledge of their language, for they already have an admirable
conception of morals, and their conduct agrees perfectly therewith.
they have a horror of adultery, and disapprove of polygamy. thieving is
unknown to them. murder is considered an abominable crime, and no one
may be killed except an enemy, when they esteem it a virtue. this,
like too many a description written then and now to exploit a colonizing
scheme, was far too good to be true. the indians proved apt learners,
but of the vices rather than the virtues of the english, and drunkenness
with all its attendant evils, was quickly introduced. afraid of their
dusky neighbors, anxious to keep on good terms with them, distrusting
their loyalty to the english under the bribes offered by french and
spanish, the government tried to limit the intercourse between the
indians and the settlers as much as possible, treating the former as
honored guests whenever they came to savannah, but forbidding the latter
to go to them without special permit in times of peace, and not at all
in time of war.

when the moravians came the restlessness which presaged war was stirring
among the tribes, becoming more and more pronounced, and one of the
indian chiefs said frankly, now our enemies are all about us, and we
can do nothing but fight, but if the beloved ones should ever give us to
be at peace, then we would hear the great word.

tomochichi, indeed, bade the missionaries welcome, and promised to
do all in his power to gain admission for them into all parts of his
nation, but the time was not ripe, nor was his influence equal to his
good-will. though called a king, he was only chief of a small
tribe living some four or five miles from savannah, part of the creek
confederacy, which was composed of a number of remnants, gradually
merged into one nation. the upper creeks lived about the head waters
of the creeks from which they took their name, and the lower creeks,
including tomochichis people, were nearer the sea-coast. ingham, whose
heart was set on the indian work, was at first very anxious to go to the
cherokees, who lived near the mountains, at a considerable distance from
savannah, having been told that they had a desire to hear the great
word. on april 22nd, he spoke of his wish to toeltschig, inviting
seifert and, if they chose, another moravian to join him in the work. it
was the best opportunity that had yet offered, and seifert wanted to go
to the indians, having already studied their language as best he could,
but they hesitated to undertake the work conjointly with ingham. after
some time the cherokee plan was abandoned. oglethorpe objected on
account of the danger that they would be intercepted and killed, it
being a fourteen day land journey to reach the cherokee country, and
he positively refused to let john wesley go because that would leave
savannah without a minister. toeltschig says wesleys interest in the
indian work failed, and another writer says he gave up the work because
he could not learn the indian language, but wesley lays all the blame on
oglethorpe.

in january, 1737, the question of going to the upper creeks was
submitted to the lot, and the moravians were bidden to wait for
another opening. meanwhile an actual beginning had been made among the
lower creeks. on the 7th of may, ingham and john wesley went up the
river to the home of mrs. musgrove, the half-breed woman who at this
time was of such great use as interpreter and mediator between the
indians and the english. arrangements were made by which ingham should
spend three days of each week with her, teaching her children to read in
exchange for instruction in the indian language. the other three or four
days were to be spent in savannah, communicating to wesley the knowledge
he had acquired, anton seifert sharing in the lessons.

on the 19th of june, the moravians held a meeting to determine whether
the time had come for them to take up the indian work in earnest. the
lot was appealed to, and the answer being that the language should be
learned, seifert, george neisser and john boehner were appointed to make
diligent use of inghams instructions. the frequent visits of tomochichi
and his people to savannah gave them an opportunity to practice
speaking, for the moravian house was always open to the red men, and
food and drink were theirs at any time of day, a fact of which the
visitors were not slow to take advantage.

the lot had so great an influence on the progress of affairs in the
moravian congregation at savannah from this time on that it is necessary
to understand how the institution was regarded. the use of the lot was
common in old testament days; and in the new testament it is recorded
that when an apostle was to be chosen to take the place of the traitor,
judas, the lot decided between two men who had been selected as in every
way suited for the place. following this example the members of the
ancient unitas fratrum used the lot in the selection of their first
ministers, and the renewed church did the same when the first elders
were elected at herrnhut in 1727. it was no uncommon practice in
germany, where many persons who desired special guidance resorted to it
more or less freely, and count zinzendorf, among the rest, had used
it from his youth up. gradually it came into general use among the
moravians, and at a later period in their history had its definite place
in their system of government, though the outside public never fully
understood it, and still holds erroneous views, despite the plain
statements that have been made. by degrees its use became more and more
restricted, and has been long since entirely abolished.

in its perfection the lot was simply this,--human intellect solving a
problem so far as earnest study and careful deliberation could go,
and then, if the issue was still in doubt, a direct appeal for divine
guidance, in perfect faith that the lord would plainly answer his
servants, who were seeking to do his will. this standard was not always
maintained, but the leaders of the moravian congregation in savannah had
the early, absolute, belief that god spoke to them through the lot,
and felt themselves bound to implicit obedience to its dictates.
their custom was to write two words or sentences on separate slips,
representing the two possible answers to their question, and after
earnest prayer to draw one slip, and then act accordingly. sometimes a
third slip, a blank, was added, and if that was drawn it signified
that no action should be taken until another time, and after further
consideration.

some time in july, peter rose and his wife, (the widow riedel) went
to live among the lower creeks, giving all their time to learning the
language, and teaching what they could about religion.

on august 9th, mr. ingham went to the moravians with a new plan. gen.
oglethorpe had agreed to build a schoolhouse for indian children, near
tomochichis village, with the idea that it would give opportunity also
to reach the older men and women with the gospel message. the house
was to contain three rooms, one for ingham, one for the moravian
missionaries, and one to be used for the school, and it was suggested
that the moravians undertake the erection of the building, the trustees
fund to pay them for their labor. the proposition was gladly accepted,
and preparations were at once made to send the necessary workmen.

on monday, the 13th, toeltschig and five others went to the spot which
had been selected for the indian schoolhouse, usually called irene.
the site of this schoolhouse has been considered uncertain, but a
short manuscript account of the mission among the indians in america,
preserved in the herrnhut archives, says distinctly that it stood a
mile above the town (of savannah) on an island in the savannah river
which was occupied by the creeks.

when the carpenters arrived the first act was to unite in prayer for a
blessing on their work, and then they began to fell trees and cut down
bushes, clearing the ground for the hut in which they were to live while
building the schoolhouse. the hut was placed on the grave of an indian
chief. the indians are accustomed to bury their chiefs on the spot
where they died, to heap a mound some 24 feet high above them, to
mourn them for a while, and then to abandon the spot, and this little
elevation was a favorable site for their hut. until the hut was finished
the men lodged with the indians, tomochichi himself taking charge of
their belongings. toeltschig returned the same day to savannah, going
back later with a supply of provisions. the indians made them heartily
welcome to their neighborhood, and the moravians, even in the midst of
their building operations, began to teach them the english alphabet, at
the same time putting forth every effort to learn the indian tongue, in
which rose was rapidly becoming proficient.

by the 20th of september the schoolhouse was finished, and ingham and
the moravians held a conference to plan the future work, and decide what
duties each should assume, as he proposed to move thither at once, and,
with the approval of the lot, rose and his wife were to do the same.
morning and evening they were to read the english bible, accompanied by
silent prayer; morning, mid-day and evening an hour was to be given to
the study of the indian language; and rose and his wife were to have
an hour for their private devotions. mrs. rose was to teach the indian
girls to read, and the boys, who had already begun to read, were to be
taught to write. in their remaining time they were to clear and plant
some land, that they might not be too long dependent on the congregation
at savannah, and on the friendly indians, who were giving them much.

the next day mr. and mrs. toeltschig escorted rose and his wife to their
new home, and at inghams request united with them in a little
prayer service. four days later fourteen of the moravians went to the
schoolhouse, which was solemnly consecrated by seifert, the chief elder.
that evening, in savannah, rose and his wife were formally set apart for
their missionary work, and the next day they returned to irene, as the
school was called, to enter upon their duties.

at first everything was encouraging. the children learned readily, not
only to read but some to write; they committed to memory many passages
of scripture, and took special delight in the hymns they were taught to
sing.

the older indians looked on with wonder and approval, which stimulated
the missionaries to new zeal in mastering the language, and in taking
every opportunity to make the great word known to them. zinzendorf
wrote a letter from herrnhut to tomochichi, commending his interest in
their message, and urging its full acceptance upon him; the indians gave
some five acres of land for a garden, which rose cleared and planted,
and everything looked promising, until the influence of the spanish war
rumor was felt. true to their nature, the fighting spirit of the indians
rose within them, and they took the war-path against the spanish, for
the sake of their english allies, and perhaps more for the pure love
of strife. then ingham decided to go to england for reinforcements,
and rose was left in charge of the work. he seems to have been a
well-meaning man, and much beloved by the indians, but he was not a man
of much mental strength or executive ability, and the congregation at
savannah soon decided that he and his wife should be recalled until the
way opened for one or more of the others to go back to irene with him.


  the society.

in their personal affairs the moravians were experiencing the usual
mingling of light and shadow.

dobers effort to make pottery was a failure, for lack of proper clay,
but through gen. oglethorpes kindness a good deal of carpenters work
was given to them. they built a house for tomochichi at his village,
and a house in savannah, both in the style of the moravian house, and
another town house in english fashion, as well as the indian school, a
large share of their wages being applied on account, so that their debt
was gradually reduced, and their credit sustained.

their manner of living remained very simple. morning and evening prayers
began and ended their days of toil, the company being divided, part
living at the garden, and part in town during the week, all gathering in
the town-house for sundays rest and worship. when the weather was very
warm the morning bible reading was postponed until the noon hour, that
advantage might be taken of the cooler air for active labor. once a
month a general conference was held on saturday evening, with others as
needed, so that all might do the work for which they were best fitted,
and which was most necessary at the time. who worked much gave much,
who worked less gave less, who did not work because he was sick or weak
gave nothing into the common fund; but when they needed food, or drink,
or clothing, or other necessary thing, one was as another.

on the 3rd of april, matthias seybold asked to be received into the
communicant congregation, which was done on the 5th of may, and he
shared in the lords supper for the first time june 3rd. john boehner
also was confirmed on january 12th of the following year.

on the 11th of november two little girls, anna and comfort, were added
to their household. the mother had recently died, and the father offered
to pay the moravians for taking care of them, but they preferred to have
them bound, so they could not be taken away just when they had begun to
learn, and so it was arranged. on the 28th, a man from ebenezer brought
his son, and apprenticed him to tanneberger, the shoemaker.

the dark side of the picture arose from two causes, ill health, and
matrimonial affairs. there was a great deal of sickness throughout
georgia that summer, and the second company became acclimated through
the same distressing process that the first had found so hard to bear.
mrs. dober, mrs. waschke, mrs. toeltschig, gottlieb demuth, john boehner
and others were sick at various times, and david jag cut his foot so
severely that he was unable to use it for four months. nor was this the
worst, for three more of their number died. roscher was sick when
he reached savannah, with consumption, it was supposed, but regnier
suspected that this was not all, and when roscher died, march 30th, he
secured permission to make an autopsy, in which he was assisted by john
wesley. the examination showed a large hematoma in the left wall of the
abdomen, and other complications. the records say, we have no cause to
grieve over his departure, for he was a good soul, and died in peace.

the next to pass away was mrs. haberecht. her health began to fail the
latter part of march, but she did not become seriously ill until the
26th of may, when she returned from the farm, where she and others had
been employed, and told her friends that the saviour had called her, and
her end was near. with joy and peace she waited for the summons, which
was delayed for some time, though on several occasions her death seemed
only a matter of hours. on the 16th of june she shared with the others
in the celebration of the communion, and on the following evening went
to the saviour.

matthias boehnischs illness was of short duration, lasting only from
the 27th of september to the 3rd of october. he had had a severe fall on
the ship coming over, from which he continued to suffer, and now a hard
blow on the chest injured him mortally. some of his companions found it
hard to understand why he should be taken, for he was a good man, who
gave promise of much usefulness in the lords service. it is an old
question, often asked and never fully answered, but boehnisch, conscious
almost to the last, was perfectly willing to go, and his associates felt
that the influence of his life would be a seed, which would bear fruit
 in others.

it was a serious mistake that sent juliana jaeschke to savannah with
the second company. a seamstress was badly needed, and had she been
so minded she might have been very useful, but in a list giving very
briefly the standing of each one in the society, it is curtly stated
that she was ill-mannered, and obstructing everything. soon after her
arrival it was suggested that she marry peter rose, but the lot forbade
and he found a much better helpmeet in the widow of friedrich riedel.
waschke thought he would like to marry juliana, but she refused, even
though bishop nitschmann, mr. and mrs. toeltschig pled with her. her
preference was for george haberland, and the result was an uncomfortable
state of affairs, which disturbed the leaders of the society not a
little, for living as they did as one large family it meant constant
friction on all sides. they did not know whether to force juliana to
submit to their authority, (as a member of the society she had pledged
herself to obedience to the duly elected officers), or whether they
should wait and hope for a better frame of mind. at last they referred
it to the lot, which read juliana shall not marry any one yet. this
settled the question for the time being, but did not improve the spirit
of the parties concerned. a few of the others were homesick, and lost
interest in their work and the cause for which they had come over.
hermsdorf returned from frederica, sick and depressed, and was kindly
received by the moravians in savannah, though their first favorable
impression of him had been lost on the voyage across the atlantic, when
he complained of the fare, and lay in bed most of the time.

the leaders of the party, trying to pacify the discontented, comfort the
sick, and strengthen those that were left as one and another was called
away; planning the daily routine to the best advantage so that they
might repay their debt, and still have the necessaries of life for their
large company; seeking to teach and convert the indians, and help the
poor about them;--these leaders were further tried by the non-arrival of
answers to the letters sent to germany. feeling that they must know the
will of those at home if they were to be able successfully to
continue their work, they at last decided to send a messenger to count
zinzendorf, and the lot designated andrew dober.

a ship was lying at anchor, ready to take gen. oglethorpe to england,
and he readily agreed to take dober and wife with him, and on december
2nd, they embarked, dober carrying a number of letters and papers. mrs.
dober was quite ill when they left, but rapidly improved in the sea
breezes. january 20th, the ship reached london, and mr. and mrs. dober
went at once to mr. weintraube, who was to forward the letters to
herrnhut. as they were talking bishop nitschmann walked in, to their
mutual great astonishment. he reported that count zinzendorf had just
arrived in london, and had sent to inquire for letters, so those brought
from georgia were at once delivered. zinzendorf rented a house, the
countess arrived a few days later, and dober and wife remained in his
service during the seven weeks of his stay.

the counts object in visiting london at this time was fourfold: to
confer with the georgia trustees about the moravians in savannah; to
extend acquaintances among the germans in london and do religious
work among them; to discuss the episcopate of the unitas fratrum with
archbishop potter of canterbury; and if possible to revive the order
of the mustard seed. this order had been established by zinzendorf and
several companions in their early boyhood, and grew with their growth,
numbering many famous men in its ranks, and it is worthy of note that
even in its boyish form it contained the germs of that zeal for missions
which was such a dominant feature of the counts manhood.

archbishop potter not only fully acknowledged the validity of the
unitys episcopate, but urged zinzendorf himself to accept consecration
at the hands of jablonski and david nitschmann, and encouraged by him
zinzendorf was consecrated bishop at berlin, may 20th, 1737.

the count held frequent services during his stay in london, and before
he left a society of ten members had been formed among the germans, with
a few simple regulations, their object being in simplicity to look to
these three things:--to be saved by the blood of christ; to become holy,
or be sanctified by the blood of christ; to love one another heartily.

with the trustees it was agreed: that the counts men might remain for
two years longer at savannah, without cultivating the five hundred
acre tract, and be exempt from all forfeitures arising from such
non-cultivation; but if they chose they might move to the tract
any time during the two years. they might go to tomochichis indians
whenever they saw fit and he consented. other indians could not be
visited in time of war, but in peace four moravians should be licensed
to go to them, on the same footing as the english ministers. those
living with tomochichi were not included in this number. as the
moravian church is believed to be orthodox and apostolic no one should
interfere with their preaching the gospel, or prevent the indians from
attending their services in savannah, or elsewhere. the title to their
five hundred acre tract was secured to the moravians, even in case the
counts male line should become extinct.

reference to military service is conspicuous by its absence, and at the
very time that these resolutions were being framed, assurance on that
one point was being desperately needed in savannah.


  rumors of war.

in february, 1737, that which spangenberg had feared came upon the
moravians,--military service was peremptorily demanded of them, the
occasion being a fresh alarm of spanish incursions.

the feud between the colonists of spain and england was of long
standing, dating back to rival claims to the new world by right of
discovery. the english asserted that through the cabots they had a
right to the greater part of north america, and a grant to the lords
proprietors of carolina, in 1663, named the 31 degree of latitude as the
southern boundary. another patent two years later set the line at the
29 degree, but that availed nothing as it included the northern part of
florida, where the spanish were already settled in considerable numbers.

no other nation questioned the english claim to the sea-board as far
as the 31 degree, which was well south of the altamaha, but the spanish
greatly resented the settlements in carolina, as encroaching on their
territory, though successive treaties between the two governments
had virtually acknowledged the english rights. with the two nations
nominally at peace, the spanish incited the indians to deeds of
violence, encouraged insurrection among the negro slaves, welcomed those
who ran away, and enlisted them in their army. now and then the governor
of carolina would send a force, which would subdue them for a time, but
the constant uncertainty made carolina welcome the georgia colony as a
protection to her borders.

the settlement of georgia gave further offense to spain, and her
subjects in florida burned to exterminate the intruders, as they
considered them, though nothing was done so long as operations were
confined to the savannah river. but when towns and forts were planned
and begun on the altamaha their opposition became more outspoken.
oglethorpe did all he could to preserve peace without retreating from
his position, and in oct. 1736, he concluded a treaty with the governor
of st. augustine.

only too soon it became apparent that this treaty would not be
respected, for the captain-general of cuba disapproved, and oglethorpe
sailed for england, in november, to urge the immediate and sufficient
fortification of the frontier. the trustees and the government approved
of the course he had pursued, but spain recalled and executed the
governor of st. augustine, for presuming to make such a treaty, and so
plainly showed her intention to make war on georgia that the english
government authorized oglethorpe to raise a regiment for service there,
and in july, 1738, he sailed for america, commissioned to take command
of all the military forces of carolina and georgia, and protect the
colonies.

during the nineteen months of his absence, the georgia colonists were in
a continual state of uneasiness, which now and then became sheer panic
at some especially plausible report of imminent danger.

on february 17th, 1737, mr. causton received a letter from charlestown,
in which the governor informed him that he had news of the approach of
the spaniards, and savannah at once became excited, and prepared for
defence. on the 20th, officers went through the town, taking the names
of all who could bear arms, freeholders and servants alike. three of
them came to the moravian house and requested names from toeltschig. he
answered there was no one among them who could bear arms, and he would
get no names from them. they said, it was remarkable that in a house
full of strong men none could bear arms,--he should hurry and give them
the names, they could not wait. toeltschig answered, if they wanted
to go no one would stop them, there would be no names given. they
threatened to tell mr. causton, toeltschig approved, and said he would
do the same, and they angrily left the house.

ingham accompanied toeltschig to mr. causton, who at once began to argue
the matter, and a spirited debate ensued, of which the following is a
resume.

causton. everybody must go to the war and fight for his own safety, and
if you will not join the army the townspeople will burn down your house,
and will kill you all.

toeltschig. that may happen, but we can not help it, it is against our
conscience to fight.

causton. if you do not mean to fight you had better go and hide in the
woods, out of sight of the people, or it will be the worse for you; and
you had better go before the enemy comes, for then it will be too late
to escape, the townspeople will certainly kill you.

toeltschig. you forget that gen. oglethorpe promised us exemption from
military service, and we claim the liberty he pledged.

causton. if the count, and the trustees and the king himself had agreed
on that in london it would count for nothing here, if war comes it will
be fight or die. if i were an officer on a march and met people who
would not join me, i would shoot them with my own hand, and you can
expect no other treatment from the officers here.

toeltschig. we are all servants, and can not legally be impressed.

causton. if the count himself were here he would have to take his gun
on his shoulder, and all his servants with him. if he were living on
his estate at old fort it would make no difference, for the order of the
magistrates must be obeyed. if the english, to whom the country belongs
must fight, shall others go free?

toeltschig finally yielded so far as to tell him the number of men in
their company, it could do no harm for we could be counted any day,
 but their names were resolutely withheld, and service firmly refused.

then the townspeople took up the cry. should they fight for these
strangers who would not do their share toward defending the land? they
would mob and kill them first! they only injured the colony at any rate,
for they worked so cheaply that they lowered the scale of wages; and
besides they received money from many people, for their services, but
spent none because they made everything they needed for themselves!

still the moravians stood firm in their position, indeed they could
do nothing else without stultifying themselves. the instructions from
zinzendorf and the leaders of the church at herrnhut, with the approval
of the lot, were definite,--they should take no part in military
affairs, but might pay any fines incurred by refusal. to oglethorpe and
to the trustees they had explained their scruples, making freedom of
conscience an essential consideration of their settling in georgia, and
from them they had received assurances that only freeholders were liable
to military duty. therefore they had claimed no land as individuals, but
had been content to live, and labor, and be called servants, paying
each week for men to serve in the night watch, in place of the absent
owners of the two town lots. in savannah their views were well known,
and to yield to orders from a magistrate, who openly declared that
promises made by the trustees, who had put him in office, were not worth
regarding, and who threatened them with mob violence, would have been
to brand themselves as cowards, unworthy members of a church which
had outlived such dire persecution as that which overthrew the ancient
unitas fratrum, and recreant to their own early faith, which had led
them to abandon homes and kindred in moravia, and seek liberty of
conscience in another kingdom. that georgia needed armed men to protect
her from the spaniards was true, but equally so she needed quiet
courage, steady industry, strict honesty, and pious lives to develop her
resources, keep peace with her indian neighbors, and win the respect of
the world, but these traits were hardly recognized as coin current by
the frightened, jealous men who clamored against the moravians.

on the 28th, it was demanded that the moravians help haul wood to the
fort which was being built. they replied that their wagon and oxen were
at the officers service without hire, and that they would feed the
animals, but personally they could take no share in the work. this
angered the people again, and several of the members began to wonder
whether they might perhaps comply so far as to assist, as a matter of
friendship, in hewing logs for the fort, refusing the wages paid to
others. the lot was tried, and absolutely forbade it, which was well,
for it developed that the people were watching for their answer, having
agreed that if they helped on the fort it would be a proof that they
could do what they chose, and were simply hiding behind an excuse in
refusing to fight.

but the tension was not relaxed, and on the 2nd of march, the moravians
met to decide on their further course. should they keep quiet, and wait
for times to change, or should they go away? it was referred to the lot,
and the paper drawn read go out from among them. this meant not merely
from the city, but from the province, for mr. causton had told them that
they would be subject to the same requirements if they were living in
the adjoining country.

on the strength of this they wrote a letter to mr. causton, rehearsing
their motives in coming to georgia, and the promises made them,
reiterating their claim for liberty of conscience, and concluding, but
if this can not be allowed us, if our remaining here be burdensome to
the people, as we already perceive it begins to be, we are willing, with
the approbation of the magistrate, to remove from this place; by this
means any tumult that might ensue on our account will be avoided, and
occasion of offense cut off from those who now reproach us that they are
obliged to fight for us.

when it came to this point mr. causton found himself by no means anxious
to drive away some thirty of his best settlers, who stood well with
oglethorpe and the trustees, and had given him all their trade for
supplies, so he began to temporize. they trusted in god, and he really
did not think their house would be burned over their heads. toeltschig
said that was the least part of it, they had come for freedom, and now
attempts were made to force them to act contrary to the dictates of
their consciences. then he declared that he had no power in the matter
of their leaving, that must be settled between the count, the trustees,
and themselves, but he could not permit them to go until he received an
order from the trustees. meanwhile he would do what he could to quiet
the peoples dissatisfaction with them.

as their debt to the trustees was not yet fully paid, caustons refusal
bound them in savannah for the time being, according to their bond, so
they had to turn elsewhere for help. early in february, they had heard
of spangenbergs return to pennsylvania from his visit to st. thomas,
and had written to ask him to come and help them for a while, but
being busy with other things he did not go. on the 5th of march, ingham
suggested that he and one of their number should go to england to the
trustees. they thought it over and decided that george neisser should
go with him as far as pennsylvania, where the case should be laid before
spangenberg, with the request that he go to london, arrange matters with
the trustees, and get permission for them to leave georgia. ingham was
going, with the approval of wesley and delamotte, to try and bring over
some of their friends to help in the work of evangelizing the province.

a ship was ready to sail for pennsylvania on the 9th, so ingham and
neisser took passage on her, and sailed, as the event proved, never to
return.




chapter vi. disintegration.



  spangenbergs visit.

after spangenberg had decided not to comply with the request contained
in the letter from savannah, but to stay and prosecute the work among
the schwenkfelders, where a door seemed to be opening, he became
conscious of a feeling of uneasiness, an impression that he was needed
in georgia. this was increased by news of the expected spanish outbreak,
for so general was the alarm that all the war-ships in the northern
harbors were ordered to carolina, and the selling of supplies to the
spaniards was absolutely prohibited.

at this point george neisser and benjamin ingham came, bringing word of
the pressure on the moravians, their decision to leave georgia as soon
as it could be arranged, and their request that spangenberg should go
to england with ingham to see the trustees, and secure their consent. of
this plan spangenberg did not approve, for he thought the war would ruin
everything, or else the danger would be over, before he could make the
long journey to england, and return. ingham professed himself ready
to carry letters to the trustees, and do his best to influence them
to grant the moravian requests, so spangenberg decided to entrust that
errand to him, and himself go at once to georgia, to see whether he
could not help matters there.

john eckstein, a resident of germantown, a middle-aged man who was
in entire sympathy with spangenbergs plans for religious work in
pennsylvania, resolved to accompany him on his trip to georgia. they
sailed from philadelphia on the 22nd of may, 1737, and had a long and
very trying voyage. the captain and crew were evil men, given to cursing
and swearing, and more than once they threatened to murder the two
passengers, whom they called sorcerers, and accused of bringing the
continuous head winds and frequent storms upon them. seventy-seven long
days the voyage lasted; twice they sailed southward past cape hatteras,
and twice were they driven back to north and east, taking weeks to
recover the distance lost; and the captain finally discovered that not
only were the elements against him, but his helmsman was slyly hindering
their progress all he could, for some malicious purpose of his own.

to the mental strain of the long journey was added physical discomfort,
for firewood gave out, so that no cooking could be done, and for a month
the crew lived on hard tack, dried cherries soaked in water, and raw
fish,--dolphins caught as need required. spangenberg and his companion
had brought provisions to supplement the ships fare, but long before
the voyage was ended their store of butter and sugar was exhausted.
dried ham and tongue had a tendency to increase their thirst, but by
soaking tea in cold water they made a beverage which bore at least a
fancied resemblance to that brewed on shore. then the supply of water
ran low, each mans allowance was reduced to a pint a day, and even this
small amount would have failed had they not been able occasionally to
catch rainwater to replenish their casks. the captain at last opened
a keg of beer found in his cargo, and sold his passengers enough to
relieve their thirst, for which they were very grateful.

but unkind words, delay, uncooked food, thirst, were not all that
spangenberg and his companion had to bear, for actual danger was added
to their experience from time to time. high waves broke over the
ship, winds tore away the sails, and a water-spout threatened total
destruction. so late was the ship in reaching port that she was given
up for lost, and word was sent to pennsylvania which caused much
grief,--needless grief, for spangenbergs days of service were not to be
ended thus. it sounds almost trivial to say that in the midst of trials
of body, mind and soul spangenberg occupied himself with making buttons,
but no doubt the homely, useful labor did its part toward rendering
endurable the seemingly endless days.

at last, on the 7th of august, the ship ran on a sandbank near tybee,
and the moravians, hearing that spangenberg was on board, took a boat
and brought him to savannah. they had asked him to go to england, he had
disregarded their request and come to georgia, but he was dear to them
through many months of united service and mutual help, and they gave him
a hearty welcome, ignoring all cause for complaint, and taking him at
once into their full confidence. he and toeltschig sat up all of the
first night carefully discussing the condition of affairs and what could
be done to remedy them. their views were very different, for spangenberg
thought they had been too hasty in deciding to leave georgia, while
toeltschig felt that it was a reflection on the lot to try and hold them
in savannah, when the lot had said go. but toeltschig possessed the
rare art of seeing a disputed question through the eyes of those who did
not agree with him, as well as from his own standpoint, and now, with
no petty self-assertion, he quietly awaited developments, and told
spangenberg all that had happened since neissers departure.

as the alarm concerning an immediate invasion by the spanish had died
away, the inhabitants of savannah had regained their composure, and the
wild outcry against the moravians gradually ceased. the wagon and oxen
which had been taken for work on the fort had been returned to their
owners, after seven or eight weeks of hard usage, and the hope that
starvation would shake the resolution of the non-combatants had signally
failed of fulfillment. the ship which was to bring the town supplies had
been twelve weeks late in coming, and the stock in the store-house
was almost exhausted. the authorities therefore had announced that
provisions would be sold only to those who were helping build the fort.
this entirely excluded the moravians, but instead of suffering from
hunger they had been able to share with some of their neighbors. the
prices charged at the store in savannah were always high, so, as he was
passing through new york on his return from st. thomas, spangenberg had
asked a friend to send the moravians two thousand pounds of flour and
salt-meat, for which they were to pay. the merchant at that time knew
of no ship sailing for savannah, so in philadelphia, spangenberg had
arranged that two thousand pounds of meat should be sent from there
at once on a years credit. meanwhile the new york merchant found an
opportunity to send what was ordered from him, so the moravians had been
surprised by a double quantity, which proved to be just what they needed
during the general scarcity. when the friends in pennsylvania heard that
provisions had been sent, but not enough to last until the next harvest,
they gave thirty-six hundred pounds of flour to spangenberg to be taken,
as a present, to the georgia moravians, and when word was received that
spangenbergs ship was lost, they sent an additional eighteen hundred
pounds, so the society was well supplied with this necessary article
of food for some time to come.

in their household affairs the moravians had had various experiences.
hermsdorf had been so thoroughly frightened by the demonstrations
against the moravians that on the 16th of may he had sailed for germany,
regardless of toeltschigs efforts to persuade him to wait, as his wife
might even then be on her way to join him. not only did he fear the
townspeople so greatly that day and night he stayed in his room as in
a prison, but he was still more afraid to face gen. oglethorpe, who, it
was said, would soon return. only once had he joined in the devotional
exercises of the household after his return from frederica, and it was
rather a relief when he left for home, having first repaid the amount
of his passage to georgia. he seems to have retained his connection with
the moravian church, for he was in herrnhut when wesley visited there,
and showed him many courtesies; and he is mentioned in 1742, as bearing
letters to the sea congregation, then about to sail for pennsylvania.

on the 6th of june a four-year-old english boy had been taken into their
household. he was an orphan, and they meant to bring him up, but the
little fellow died on the 23rd of july.

on the 10th of june the matrimonial troubles of george waschke and
juliana jaeschke had been happily terminated by their marriage. waschke
had been one of the discontents ever since the arrival of the second
company, but when his marriage was finally arranged he professed himself
contrite, and promised all obedience to the rules of the society, so
long as he stayed in savannah, though he retained his desire to leave
as soon as possible. juliana also had greatly improved in her behaviour
before the wedding.

this marriage was the cause of a very interesting discussion among the
moravians, as to who should perform the ceremony. in the afternoon
the brethren met to decide who should be appointed to marry waschke
and juliana. properly br. peter (rose) should have been ordained by br.
anton (seifert) to the office of a diener in the congregation, that he
might marry and baptize, but the brethren did not think it necessary to
ordain him on waschkes account, and voted that toeltschig should marry
them. he objected, but they said toeltschig had been made a diener of
the congregation at herrnhut. he protested that he had not been sent
to georgia to marry and baptize, and did not wish to do it. the others
insisted, and asked that the lot be tried; toeltschig agreed to submit
to their wish, and the lot drawn read he shall marry these two, which
he did the next day.

parallel with this is the baptism of roses twin daughters, anna
catherina and maria magdalena, who were born on the 16th of september,
1737,--anna catherina dying later in the same year. of this toeltschig
wrote: i, at the request of the brethren, baptized them in the name of
the father, the son, and of the holy ghost, after br. anton (seifert)
had ordained me a diener in the congregation.

it frequently happens that a puzzling action becomes clear when it is
considered from the standpoint of the man who has done it, but when
the motive can not be fathomed many things are hard to understand. that
seifert had been empowered to delegate to another member a duty usually
reserved for the clergy, was reasonable, though unusual, for his serious
illness or death would have left the congregation without ministration
until word could be sent to germany, and some one else could come to
take his place,--a matter of months,--but, when the aeltester was
present, in full health, in entire accord with his congregation, and
when he in person confirmed candidates for church membership, why did
he not marry and baptize directly, instead of ordaining a diener
 especially for those two offices? there must have been some regulation
in the congregation at herrnhut which led to it, for the idea that
seifert himself should marry waschke and juliana, and baptize the rose
children, evidently did not occur to them, but the rule can not now be
found, and there is no clue to the strange proceeding.

soon after the waschke affair had been settled to the satisfaction of
all parties, serious trouble had arisen with jag and haberecht. it was
reported to the moravians that jag had engaged himself to a swiss woman
living in savannah, and when questioned he admitted that it was true.
they argued with him, and pled with him, but to no avail, and finally
told him plainly that they would not allow him to bring the woman to
their house, and more than that, if he persisted in his determination
he would have to leave them; and angry and defiant he did take his
departure the next day, july the 10th.

that troubles never come singly was exemplified, for the very day that
jag left, haberecht went to toeltschig, and asked if some way could not
be found so that he could marry that same swiss woman! toeltschig was
almost stunned by this second blow, and gave a stern answer, whereupon
haberecht applied to seifert, the aeltester, who was equally as
unyielding in his condemnation of the acquaintance already made, and his
refusal to countenance further steps. poor haberecht, less resolute than
jag in his rebellion, drank deeply of the waters of marah during the
next weeks; promising to give up the woman, who was really unworthy of
his regard, and then trying to draw toeltschig into a discussion of his
possible marriage; despairingly making his way to the garden to hide
himself among the swine, feeling he was fit for no better company,
and then going to the woman and asking her to marry him, to which she
consented, having already thrown jag over; again bitter repentance,
confession, and a plea that his associates would forgive him. either he
was really in earnest this time, or spangenbergs arrival had a salutary
effect, for after that the swiss woman disappears from the story, and
two months later jag returned, promised good behaviour, and humbly asked
for readmittance to the household which was at once accorded him.

the first days of his visit to savannah, spangenberg spent in
acquainting himself with the condition of affairs, and in interviews
with the members singly and collectively, trying to persuade them to
content themselves in georgia. the bands were reorganized, but he was
unable to re-establish a feeling of unity among them, and even those
who were willing to stay, and work, and try whether their plan might not
still be carried out, felt that it would be unwise to hold the rest, for
as toeltschig wrote, almost with a groan, it is a blessed thing to live
with a little company of brethren, who are of one heart and one soul,
where heart and mind are dedicated to jesus, but so to live, when many
have weak wills and principles, and there must be a community of goods,
is rather difficult, especially when many seek their own ends, not the
things of christ.

spangenberg was forced to see that his arguments were futile, and wisely
yielded to the inevitable. at a general conference each man was called
upon to state his wishes. several desired to leave at the earliest
possible moment, others as soon as the debt was fully paid; two or three
wanted to return to europe, others preferred to go to pennsylvania to
spangenberg; some longed to live among the indians as missionaries,
while quite a number were content to stay in savannah, unless absolutely
forced to leave, or definitely called to labor elsewhere. however, no
immediate steps were taken toward breaking up the settlement.

on the 12th of august, spangenberg and wesley visited the salzburgers
at ebenezer, by the invitation of bolzius, the senior pastor. they, too,
had had their troubles without and within, and gronau had mourned over
the fact to the moravians, who deeply sympathized with him. at this time
gronau and bolzius differed greatly in their feeling for the moravians.
gronau was openly and honestly on the best of terms with them, but
bolzius, while occasionally accepting their hospitality in savannah,
sent complaints to the trustees, in keeping with his original protest
against their coming to georgia. the english friends of the moravians
heard of these letters, and were much puzzled, as the reports from
the savannah congregation spoke only of pleasant relations with the
salzburgers, and requests for union of the two forces. probably bolzius
was fretted by their refusal to join him, even as the leaders at halle
resented the independence of herrnhut, and after gronaus death, in
1745, the pastors of ebenezer steadily opposed the efforts of the
moravians to recommence a mission work in georgia.

apart from the friction with their fellow townsmen and the lack of
united purpose among their own number, spangenberg found the moravian
colony in good condition. their devotional hours were steadily observed,
the lords supper was celebrated regularly, and a weekly conference kept
the many interests of the society running smoothly.

by the aid of the second company, various improvements had been made, so
that their lots and garden presented a prosperous appearance. they have
a house in town (on spangenbergs lot) with a supply of wood for the
kitchen. behind the house is a well, with a pump, on which almost
the whole town depends, for it not only never goes dry, as do all the
others, but it has the best water to be found in the town. from early
morning to late at night the people come with barrels, pails and
pitchers, to take the water to their homes. once some one suggested
that strangers should be charged so much a pail for the benefit of the
orphans, but frank said they have so far received spiritual water from
us without price, let them also have this freely. between the well and
the house is a cow shed. they have a cow, which is pastured out during
the day, but comes back in the evening, and they use the milk and butter
for the sick. near the shed is a kitchen and bake-oven, and on the other
side a hut for their provisions. behind the well, on nitschmanns lot,
stands on one side tannebergers and on the other roses cabin, with
a roof between, under which the leather is stored, which is to be made
into shoes.

two english miles from the town they have cleared ten acres, (the
garden) and planted corn and rice, which is growing nicely. they have
set out mulberry, peach, and apple trees, which are doing well; in the
middle of the garden, which is enclosed with a fence and ditch, they
have built a corn-house, a cabin in which to live, and a stable.
 another cabin, the first erected in the garden, had been burned in
january, at which time mrs. waschke was living in it, though she was
away when it caught fire, and returned too late to give an alarm and
save it. the farm four miles from town was proving unsatisfactory,
requiring much labor and yielding little return, and they had about
decided to stop cultivating it, and give all their effort to the garden,
which was paying well.

from the 14th to the 17th of august, spangenberg busied himself with the
account between the moravians and the trustees. in addition to the bonds
signed by the first and second companies for their passage to georgia,
and provisions to be delivered on arrival, it had been necessary to get
a great deal at the store on credit. on the other hand the men had done
a considerable amount of carpenter work and hauling for the trustees and
for others. the account on the books at the trustees store was all
in confusion, and as everybody at the store claimed to be too busy to
unravel it, spangenberg obtained permission to do it himself, and found
that in addition to the bonds, (60 pounds and 226 pounds 13 shillings 9
pence,) the moravians had taken supplies to an amount which gave them
a total debt of some 500 pounds ($2,400.00). against this they had
a credit which entirely paid their current account at the store, and
reduced their debt to the trustees to 121 pounds 2 shillings 9 pence,
($580.80).

on the 19th, a lovefeast was held in honor of spangenberg and eckstein,
and on the 21st of august the two visitors sailed for pennsylvania,
landing there safely in due time.


  a closing door.

with the month of september letters began to come from england and
germany in response to dobers report, and the communications sent by
ingham, who presented the moravian request to the trustees, (receiving
a sour answer,) and also sent a full account of their circumstances
to count zinzendorf. the count had already written to his distressed
brethren, giving his advice on various points, and this letter, which
was the first to arrive, gave them little comfort. they had once hoped
for reinforcements, earnest men and women who would strengthen their
hands for the work among the indians, and even now it was disappointing
to hear that zinzendorf had decided not to send any more colonists to
georgia. he argued that it would take very few men to supply teachers
for tomochichis little village, and that as the trustees would only
permit four missionaries among the more distant tribes, that number
could easily be spared from the company already in savannah.

regarding military service he repeated his former definite instructions,
you will not bear arms either defensive or offensive. he said that he
had tried to secure from the trustees a formal dispensation, either
verbal or written, exempting the moravians entirely from military duty,
but they refused to give it, insisting that the moravians must at least
employ two men to represent the two town lots in defense of the country.
zinzendorf had agreed to this, so far as the night watch was concerned,
since such a watch was necessary for civic peace and well-being, and
the moravians were authorized to pay the necessary sums therefor, but he
considered it inconsistent to refuse to fight as a matter of conscience
and then hire others to do it, and so, as he said, there is nothing to
do but to say no, and wait.

although spangenberg had hoped it would not be necessary for the
moravians to leave georgia, he had sent the trustees their request
for permission to go, adding, nor indeed is there any reason why they
should be detained, since it is their full intention and design to pay
every farthing of their debt before they stir a foot; and they have
never yet sold their liberty to any man, neither are they bound to any
man by any writing or agreement whatsoever. i doubt not therefore but
ye will readily shew the same clemency towards innocent and inoffensive
men, which any one may expect from your honors, whose business is not to
destroy but to save and benefit mankind. may it please you therefore
to send orders to the magistrate of savannah that these people may
have leave to depart that province. i do assure your honors they always
thought it a great favor that ye were pleased to send them thither; but
now they will think it a greater to be dismissed.

in reply the trustees wrote to mr. causton, forbidding the introduction
of martial law without their express order, and reproving him for having
required more than two men from the moravians, but in that very reproof
practically insisting that two must serve. the moravians thought they
had defined their position clearly at the outset, and believed they had
the trustees promise that all should be as they desired, and if the
trustees realized the construction placed upon their words they had
taken a most unfair advantage of the moravians by offering them the two
town lots as a special favor, and then using the ownership of those lots
as a lever to force unwelcome service. on the other hand the trustees
claimed that zinzendorf had tacitly agreed to furnish two fighting men
when he allowed spangenberg and nitschmann to take the two freeholds,
and one can hardly imagine that the gentlemen who served as trustees of
georgia would stoop to a subterfuge to gain two soldiers. probably it
was an honest misunderstanding for which neither side was to blame,
and of which neither could give a satisfactory explanation, each party
having had a clear idea of his own position, and having failed to
realize that in the confusion of tongues the other never did grasp the
main point clearly.

regarding the moravian request for permission to leave, the trustees
declined to give instructions until after an exchange of letters with
zinzendorf; but in a second letter to his congregation, the count wrote,
if some do not wish to remain, let them go, and if the authorities
will not do what you demand it is certain that you must break up and go
further; but whether to pennsylvania, or new york or carolina, the
lord will show you. carolina would be no better than georgia for
their purpose, for the military conditions were identical, and bishop
nitschmanns advice that they go to pennsylvania, together with
spangenbergs residence there, decided them in favor of that location.

zinzendorfs permission having cleared the way for departure, they
resolved to wait no longer on the trustees, and a general conference was
held on september 18th, in which definite arrangements were made for
the assumption of the debt by those who were willing as yet to remain
in georgia, freeing the four who were to go first. a recent letter had
informed tanneberger of the death of his wife and children in herrnhut,
and the news shattered his already weak allegiance. without them he
cared little where he went, or what became of him, if only he could get
away, and haberecht was more than ready to join him. his young son went
as a matter of course, and meyer, another member who had been lazy and
unsatisfactory, completed the party, which sailed for pennsylvania on
the 16th of october. jag also intended to go, but for some reason waited
for the next company.

haberecht settled at ephrata, and the two tannebergers at germantown. in
1741, haberecht joined the moravians who were building in the forks
of the delaware, and became one of the first members of the bethlehem
congregation. in 1745, david tanneberger married regina demuth, who
had lost her husband the previous year, and they ultimately moved to
bethlehem also. meyer never renewed his association with the moravians.

before the four started to pennsylvania, another member had taken the
longer journey, and had been laid beside his brethren in the savannah
cemetery. this was george haberland, who died september 30th, from flux,
a prevalent disease, from which almost all of the colonists suffered at
one time or another. he had learned much during his life in georgia,
had been confirmed in june with his brother michael, and had afterward
served acceptably as a diener of the congregation.

on the 7th of october, seifert and boehner moved to tomochichis village
to perfect themselves in the language, and begin their missionary work.
as some of the congregation had already left savannah, and others were
soon to follow, seifert thought that he could be spared even though he
was aeltester, especially as at first he returned to savannah every
saturday to hold the sunday services. in november he and boehner spent
several weeks in town helping the carpenters raise the frame of a large
house they were building, and when they returned to the indians in
january, 1738, peter rose, his wife, and surviving daughter went with
them.

friday, december 13th, john wesley left savannah, to return to england.
his popularity had long since waned, in the face of his rigid insistance
on ecclesiastical rules, and it was said the brethren alone can
understand him, and remain in love with him. he was unfortunate enough
to provoke a spiteful woman, a niece of mr. causton, the magistrate, and
so greatly did the persecution rage under her influence, that wesleys
chance of doing further good was ruined, and nothing was left but
for him to withdraw. the magistrates forbade him to leave, (secretly
rejoicing that they had driven him away,) but he boldly took his
departure, without molestation, making his way to beaufort, where
charles delamotte joined him. together they went to charlestown, where
he parted from delamotte, and on the 2nd of january, 1738, sailed from
the continent that had witnessed the shattering of so many fond hopes
and ambitions.

forty-seven years later brierly allen settled in savannah, the first
minister there to represent the great denomination which grew from
wesleys later work in england, and the first methodist society in that
city of his humiliation was organized in 1806.

during the preceding summer zinzendorf had written to the trustees,
asking once more for (1) entire exemption from military service for the
georgia moravians, for (2) permission for them to leave georgia if this
could not be granted, and (3) that at least four might remain among the
indians as missionaries.

in answer the trustees (1) repeated their former decision regarding
freehold representation, (2) gave consent for the moravians to leave
if they would not comply with this, and (3) refused to let them stay
as missionaries. the privilege of going among the indians was given
to your people out of consideration for your excellency, and also on
account of their good conduct, they being citizens of this colony; but
if they cease to reside there, this privilege will not be continued
to any of them. to employ them as missionaries to instruct the indians
would be a reflection on our country, as if it could not furnish a
sufficient number of pious men to preach the gospel of jesus christ.
therefore your people may continue among the indians, only so long as
they are citizens of the colony.

this was the death-blow to the moravian settlement in georgia. had
the trustees exemplified their much-vaunted religious toleration by
respecting the conscientious scruples of the moravians, there were
enough members of the savannah congregation who wanted to stay in
georgia to form the nucleus of the larger colony which would surely have
followed them, for while they were willing to give up everything except
religious liberty, they were human enough to regret having to abandon
the improvements which they had made at the cost of so much labor and
self-denial. the church at large shared this feeling, and for many years
watched and waited for an opportunity to re-open the work in savannah,
but without result. if the trustees had even permitted the moravians to
stay as missionaries it might have saved the settlement to georgia,
for within a decade the english parliament passed an act granting the
moravians the very exemption for which they now asked in vain, and
had there been a promising work begun among the indians during the
intervening years it would inevitably have drawn more laborers, as it
did in pennsylvania. but the trustees shut the door in their faces,
other promising and more hospitable fields opened, and the moravian
efforts were thereafter given to the upbuilding of other commonwealths.

in the latter part of january, 1738, eight more of the moravian
colonists left savannah,--gotthard demuth and his wife, george waschke,
his wife and mother, augustin neisser, gottlieb demuth, and david jag,
those who remained giving them money and provisions for their journey
to pennsylvania. gotthard demuth and wife settled in germantown,
later moving to bethlehem and joining in the organization of that
congregation. in 1743 they were again living at germantown, where
gotthard died the following year. regina subsequently married david
tanneberger and moved once more to bethlehem. gottlieb demuth lived
at several places, but finally married, and settled in the moravian
congregation at schoeneck. jag, who located at goshenhopper, and the
waschkes and augustin neisser who went to germantown, never rejoined the
church.

on the 28th of january, the moravians in savannah received an
unlooked-for addition to their number. toeltschig wrote to spangenberg,
yesterday two boys, who belong to herrnhut, came unexpectedly to our
house. they ran away from the brethren in ysselstein and went to mr.
oglethorpe in london, begging him to send them to the brethren in
georgia. he did so, but we will have to pay their transportation. one is
zeisbergers son david, about 17 years old, and the other john michael
schober, about 15 years old. both are bad boys. it appears that when
zeisbergers parents went to georgia he was left in herrnhut to finish
his education. from there count zinzendorf took him to a moravian
settlement near utrecht, holland, where he was employed as errand boy
in a shop. he was treated with well-meant but ill-judged severity, and
finally after a particularly trying and undeserved piece of harshness in
october, 1737, he and his friend schober decided to try and make their
way to his parents in georgia. in this they succeeded, and though their
story was received with disapprobation, they soon made a place for
themselves. schober did not live very long, but zeisberger, from the
bad boy of toeltschigs letter, became the assistant of peter boehler
in south carolina, and later the great apostle to the indians.

during this spring the moravians strained every nerve to do an amount
of work sufficient to balance their account with the trustees. it took
a little longer than they expected, but at last toeltschig was ready for
his journey to england, the lot having previously decided that he should
go as soon as financial affairs made it proper. his wife remained in
savannah, it being uncertain whether he would stay in germany or return
to america. john regnier took his place as financial agent of the
moravians.

on march 12th, toeltschig went aboard a ship, bound for charlestown,
sailing from tybee two days later. on the 18th, he reached charlestown,
whence he sailed april 1st, bearing with him the record of their account
with the trustees, and commissioned to tell the authorities at herrnhut
all about the georgia colony. on the 30th of may, the vessel touched at
cowes, where toeltschig landed, making his way overland to london which
he reached on the 2nd of june.

on the 11th of june, toeltschig, accompanied by richter, went to present
the account to the trustees. they asked him many questions concerning
georgia, all of which he answered frankly, receiving most courteous
attention. three days later a settlement was reached. the written
accounts showed that the moravians were short 3 pounds 5 shillings 5
pence, which toeltschig offered to pay in cash, but the trustees said
they realized that the supplies provided for in the second bond had
been rated at a higher price in georgia than in england, and they
were content to consider the obligations as fully discharged, interest
included. toeltschig answered i am very glad, a short sentence which
spoke volumes!


  wesley, ingham and toeltschig.

during the days which elapsed between his arrival in london and the
meeting of the trustees, toeltschig had many interviews with those who
had been awakened by the two companies of moravian colonists, by count
zinzendorf, and by peter boehler and george schulius. the last two
were even then at portsmouth, on their way to america, and the interest
caused by their visit was very manifest.

john and charles wesley had been particularly attracted to boehler,
the former especially finding great relief in laying his many spiritual
perplexities before him. wesley complained that when he conversed
with spangenberg in georgia, and they could not agree on any point,
spangenberg would drop the subject and refuse to discuss it further,
but in boehler he found a clearness of argument, and power of persuasion
which convinced without irritating him.

having passed through many stages with the guidance, sympathy, and
encouragement of boehler, wesley at last found the assurance of
salvation he had sought for so many years, and three weeks after boehler
left london, he records that at a meeting of their society i felt i did
trust in christ, christ alone for salvation, and an assurance was given
me that he had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law
of sin and death. a few days previously his brother charles had made
the same happy experience, and this gave to their religious life the
warmth and fervor which, added to the zeal, industry and enthusiasm that
had always characterized them, made their labors of so much value to
england, and founded the denomination which has grown so rapidly in
america, still bearing the name once given in derision to the little
group of oxford methodists.

but wesleys mind was not one of those which can rest contentedly upon
one vital truth, he must needs run the whole gamut of emotion, and
resolve every point raised by himself or others into a definite negative
or affirmative in his own life. once settled in a position to his entire
satisfaction, he was as immovable as a mountain, and this was at once
the source of his power and his weakness, for thousands gladly followed
the resolute man, and found their own salvation therein, while on the
other hand the will which would never bend clashed hopelessly with those
who wished sometimes to take their turn in leading. so he became an
outcast from the church of england, alienated from ingham, whitefield,
and other friends of his youth, estranged from the moravians, even while
he was one of the greatest religious leaders england has ever produced.

at the time of toeltschigs sojourn in london, however, he was in
the early, troubled stage of his experience, rejoicing in what he had
attained through boehlers influence, but beset with doubts and fears.
and so, as he records in his journal, he determined to retire for a
short time into germany, where he hoped the conversing with those holy
men who were themselves living witnesses of the full power of faith, and
yet able to bear with those that are weak, would be a means, under god,
of so establishing his soul, that he might go on from faith to faith,
and from strength to strength.

ingham, meanwhile, informed of toeltschigs arrival in london, had
hastened over one hundred and forty miles to see his friend, a fact
that seems to have touched toeltschig deeply, and arranged to go with
him to herrnhut, as they had often planned while still in georgia. john
wesley joined them, and the three young men sailed on june 24th,
landing at rotterdam two days later. wesleys journal does not mention
toeltschig by name, but on leaving rotterdam he says, we were eight
in all, five english and three germans, and there is no doubt that
toeltschig went with them to marienborn to report to count zinzendorf,
who was living there during his temporary exile from herrnhut.

in rotterdam, dr. koker showed the party much kindness, while at baron
von wattevilles in ysselstein, they were received as at home. at
amsterdam, they joined in the meeting of the societies established
under moravian influences, and from there proceeded to cologne, and
up the rhine to frankfort. having neglected to supply themselves with
passports, they experienced much difficulty whenever they reached a
walled city, sometimes being refused admittance altogether, and at other
times being allowed to enter only after much delay, which caused wesley
to greatly wonder that common sense and common humanity do not put an
end to this senseless, inhuman usage of strangers. when any of their
number had an acquaintance in the city to which they had come they
sent in a note to him, and he would arrange for their entrance, and at
frankfort they applied to peter boehlers father, who entertained them
in the most friendly manner.

on tuesday, july 15th, they reached marienborn, where wesley remained
for fifteen days, and ingham for about seven weeks.

from marienborn, wesley went to herrnhut, stopping at erfurt, weimar,
jena, halle, leipsig and dresden on the way. he remained at herrnhut
twelve days, and then returned by the same route to marienborn, and to
england.

this trip to germany has been given as the beginning of the breach
between wesley and the moravians, but it is doubtful whether such was
really the case. in the memoirs of james hutton it is stated that
wesley was offended because ingham was admitted to the communion at
marienborn, while permission was refused him, and that he secretly
brooded over the injury, but wesley himself does not mention the
occurrence, and refers to marienborn as a place where he met what he
sought for, viz.: living proofs of the power of faith, and where he
stayed twelve days longer than he at first intended. the tone of his
account of herrnhut is also distinctly friendly, though he did not
unreservedly accept two or three theological statements made to him, but
the long conversations he records prove his joy at finding sympathy, and
confirmation of what he wanted to believe concerning justification by
faith, and the fact that a weak faith was still a real faith, and as
such should be cherished and strengthened, not despised. he could not
have been greatly influenced against the moravians by his visit to
halle, for each time he stayed but one night, and on the first occasion
professor francke was not at home, nor were their arguments new to him,
that they should have impressed him deeply.

it frequently happens that when a controversy has arisen between
friends, both parties look backward and read into former words and
deeds a meaning they did not have at the time they transpired, and most
probably this is what has happened in regard to the trip to germany and
its effect on wesley.

immediately on his return to england, wesley began an active religious
campaign, drawing such crowds of all kinds of people that the various
churches in turn closed their doors upon him, and eight months later he
followed whitefield into open air preaching, after consultation with
the fetter lane society. this society had been organized at the time of
boehlers visit to london, and was composed of members of the earlier
methodist societies, germans residing in london, and english who had
been interested in salvation by zinzendorf and the moravian companies
bound for georgia. it had met in the home of james hutton until it
outgrew the rooms, and was then transferred to the chapel at 32 fetter
lane. it was an independent society, with no organic connection with
the moravian church, and the religious work was carried on under the
leadership of john wesley, and, in his frequent absences, by james
hutton and others who leaned strongly toward the moravians, some of
whose customs had been adopted by the society. the hutton memoirs
 state that wesley made an effort to break off intercourse between
the society and the moravians soon after his return from germany, but
failed, and matters continued to move smoothly until about the time that
wesley began his field preaching. during the subsequent months disputes
arose among the members, largely on account of views introduced by
philip henry molther, who at that time had a tendency toward quietism.
molther was detained for some time in england, waiting for a ship to
take him to pennsylvania, he having received a call to labor in the
moravian churches there, and being a fluent speaker he learned english
rapidly and made a deep impression on many hearers.

wesley was much hurt by the dissensions in his society, and entirely
opposed to molthers views, and after several efforts to bring all
the members back to his own position, he, on sunday, july 31st, 1740,
solemnly and definitely condemned the errors and withdrew from the
fetter lane society, adding you that are of the same judgment, follow
me. about twenty-five of the men and seven or eight and forty likewise
of the fifty women that were in the band accepted his invitation, and
with them he organized the foundry society. into the foundry society
and the many others organized among his converts, wesley introduced
lovefeasts and bands (or classes,) both familiar to him from the
fetter lane society, which had copied them from the moravians. when his
societies grew so numerous that he could not personally serve them all
he selected lay assistants, and then became convinced that presbyter
and bishop are of the same order, and that he had as good a right to
ordain as to administer the sacraments. he, therefore, ordained bishops
for america, and scotland, and registered his chapels in order to
protect them, according to the act of toleration. this gave the
methodist body a separate legal status, but wesley always claimed that
he was still a member of the church of england, and would not allow the
preachers of his english societies to administer the sacraments, a right
which was finally granted them by the methodist conference after his
death.

when benjamin ingham returned from georgia he commenced to preach the
gospel in yorkshire, his native place, and at the time of his journey
to germany a promising work was begun there. from herrnhut he wrote to
count zinzendorf asking that toeltschig be permitted to visit him in
england, and the request was granted a few months later. meanwhile
inghams work prospered mightily, so that in june, 1739, he was
forbidden the use of the churches, and forced to imitate wesley and
preach in the open air. some forty societies were formed, and in
november, toeltschig went to him, making many friends among the people,
repeating his visit at intervals during the following months.

the intimacy between ingham and the moravians became closer and closer,
and in july, 1742, he formally handed over the care of his societies in
yorkshire and lascashire to the moravian church, himself going into new
fields, and then giving new societies into their keeping. it has often
been stated that ingham was a moravian, but this is a mistake. during
these years he worked with them shoulder to shoulder, but there is no
record of his having been received into their church as a member, nor
did they reordain him into their ministry. the situation would be
more strange to-day than it was then, for there was apparent chaos in
england, the spirit of god moving upon the face of the waters before
light shone, and order from disorder sprung, and the moravians did
not care to emphasize their independence of the anglican church lest
it injure their usefulness. in 1744, when england was threatened with a
french invasion, a number of loyal addresses were presented to the king,
and among them one from the united brethren in england, in union
with the ancient protestant episcopal bohemian and moravian church, a
designation selected after long and careful discussion as to a true term
which would avoid placing them among the dissenters from the church of
england.

when the moravians took over the yorkshire societies in 1742 they
established headquarters at smith house, near halifax, but this not
proving permanently available, ingham, in 1744, bought an estate near
pudsey, where the moravians planted a settlement which they called
lambs hill, later fulneck. in 1746 and 1749 ingham presented to the
moravians the ground on which the chapel and two other houses stood, but
for the rest they paid him an annual rent. the property is now held of
inghams descendents on a lease for five hundred years.

in 1753 ingham withdrew from his close association with the moravians,
and established a new circle of societies, himself ordaining the
ministers who served them. these societies flourished for a while,
but about 1759 ingham became imbued with the doctrines of a certain
sandeman, and the result was the almost total wrecking of his societies.
this broke inghams heart, and affected his mind, so that his last
days were very sad. he passed away in 1772, and his societies gradually
merged themselves into other churches.

john toeltschig, inghams friend in georgia and his co-laborer in
yorkshire, came to england in november, 1739, in company with hutton,
who had been to germany to form a closer acquaintance with the
moravians. after the debt to the trustees was paid, toeltschig had
eagerly planned new things for georgia,--extension of work among the
indians, a settlement further up the savannah river, the strengthening
of the savannah congregation, from which missionaries could be drawn
and by which they should be supported while laboring among the heathen
tribes. he offered to return to america at once, ready for any duty, but
requesting that he might not be sole financial manager again, as he had
found it most difficult to attend to those duties, and at the same time
share in the spiritual work.

the elders of the church, after carefully weighing all the
circumstances, decided not to send him back to georgia, but that he
should go to england, to labor in the fetter lane society, and among its
friends.

the first step was a visit to ingham in yorkshire, and the reception
given him was so cordial and the field so promising that he went again,
and yet again. boehler and spangenberg returned to england and traveled
hither and thither in response to the calls that came from every
side, other members aided as they could, and the societies under
their direction grew apace. fetter lane society was organized into a
congregation in november, 1742, and the others followed in due time. the
moravian church was introduced into ireland, and took a firm hold there.
in england its successes were paralleled with much opposition, and
in 1749, after several years of preparation, an appeal was made to
parliament for recognition as a protestant episcopal church, with full
liberty of conscience and worship throughout great britain and her
colonies. general oglethorpe warmly championed their cause, and after
a thorough investigation of moravian history and doctrine, the bill was
passed, may 12th, 1749, and the moravian right to liberty of worship,
freedom from military service, and exemption from oath-taking was
unreservedly granted.

while not involved in these parliamentary proceedings, toeltschig played
an important part in the development of the moravian church in england
and ireland. although he had great success as a preacher, his especial
talents were as an organizer, and as leader of the bands, as might
be expected of a man with a judicial mind, executive ability, and great
tact. he was elder of the pilgrim congregation formed at fetter lane
in may, 1742, a congregation composed exclusively of laborers in the
lords vineyard, and he was also one of the committee charged with the
oversight of the general work.

in february, 1748, he went to ireland, as superintendent of the
societies there, some of which had been organized by wesley, but now
wished to unite with the moravians. in 1752 he conducted a company of
colonists to pennsylvania, but the next year went back to ireland, where
certain troubles had arisen which he could quiet better than any one
else.

after zinzendorfs death in 1760, toeltschig was one of that company of
leading men who met in herrnhut to provide for the immediate needs of
the moravian church, whose enemies prophesied disintegration upon the
death of the man who had been at its head for more than thirty years.
these predictions failed of fulfillment, and it was demonstrated that
the lord had further employment for the unitas fratrum.

less renowned than many of his confreres, toeltschig was a type of that
class of moravians who carried their church through slight and
blight into the respect and good-will of the world. industrious and
scrupulously exact in business affairs, courteous and considerate in his
dealings with others, firm and fearless in matters of conscience,
bold to declare his faith, and witness for his master, energetic and
conservatively progressive in promoting the growth of his church, he
took little part in the controversies of his day, but devoted himself
unreservedly to preaching the gospel as it was read by john hus, by the
founders of the ancient unitas fratrum, by the renewers of that church
in herrnhut, salvation by faith in christ and real christian living
according to the precepts of the bible.


  the negro mission.

john toeltschig had been the diarist of the moravian congregation in
savannah, as well as their treasurer and most able member, and after he
left very little record was kept of the daily occurrences. a few stray
letters have been preserved, but little of interest appears therein,
beyond the facts that the summer of 1738 was hot and dry, and that
the moravians were not molested, although always conscious of the
under-current of antagonism.

some time during these months matthias seybold left for pennsylvania,
where he married, and was one of the company that established the
settlement at bethlehem. he returned to europe in 1742, and died at
herrnhut in 1787.

in may, the rev. george whitefield reached georgia, authorized to
perform all religious offices as deacon of the church of england, in
savannah and frederica, in the place of john wesley. the poverty of the
people touched him deeply, he distributed to the most needy such sums as
he had brought for their relief, and with james habersham, who had come
over at the same time, he agreed upon the erection of an orphan house.
whitefield visited ebenezer, and acquainted himself with conditions
there and elsewhere, and then returned to england, in august, to raise
funds for his orphan house, habersham meanwhile beginning to collect and
instruct the most neglected children.

during his stay in georgia, whitefield lodged with charles delamotte,
who was still carrying on the little school. during the winter delamotte
had boarded for a while with the moravians, and when he returned to
england in the autumn, he at once associated himself with the english
members. tyerman in his life and times of john wesley, says, on
his return to england, charles delamotte became a moravian, settled at
barrow-upon-humber, where he spent a long life of piety and peace, and
died in 1790.

on the 16th of october, peter boehler and george schulius arrived in
savannah, accompanied by the lad, simon peter harper. they came
as missionaries to the negroes of carolina, the hearts of various
philanthropic englishmen having been touched by reports of the condition
of these half wild savages recently imported from the shores of africa
to till the fields of the new world.

the plan originated during count zinzendorfs visit to london, in
february, 1737, when it was suggested to him that such a mission should
be begun by two moravian men, under the auspices of the associates of
the late dr. bray.

thomas bray, an english divine, was born in 1656, made several
missionary trips to america, and in 1697 organized a society for the
propagation of the gospel in the english colonies. he died in 1730,
but the work was continued by his associates, many of whom were also
interested in the georgia colony.

as this mission was to be under their direction, the associates of the
late dr. bray wished to be very sure that the doctrine and rules of the
unitas fratrum did not conflict with the church of england, but being
assured by the archbishop of canterbury that he considered them
as agreeing in all essential points, they closed an agreement with
zinzendorf whereby the count received 30 pounds with which to prepare
two brethren to reside for the instruction of the negroes at such place
in carolina as the said associates shall direct. the missionaries,
when they had entered upon their work, were to receive a salary, not
exceeding thirty pounds a year, from the associates.

for this missionary enterprise, so much to his liking, zinzendorf
appointed one of my chaplains, master boehler, and schulius, a
moravian brother, who with richter and wenzel neisser arrived in
london, february 18th, 1738. at the house of their friend wynantz,
the dutch merchant, they met john wesley, who offered to secure them a
pleasant, inexpensive lodging near james huttons, where he was staying.

peter boehler had been a student at jena when spangenberg was lecturing
there, and was himself a professor at that seat of learning when he
decided to accept zinzendorfs call to mission work, and join the
moravians, with whom he had been for a long time in sympathy. like
spangenberg he was a highly educated man, and an able leader, fitted to
play an important part in the church of his adoption. in december, 1737,
he was ordained at herrnhut by the bishops, david nitschmann and count
zinzendorf, and in later years he, too, became a bishop of the unity.

on the 22nd of february, boehler and his companions called on gen.
oglethorpe, who at first supposed they were simply going over to join
the savannah congregation. boehler explained that richter, who spoke
french as well as german, had come as the agent of the moravians, in
accordance with the suggestion made by the trustees to bishop nitschmann
in 1736; that wenzel neisser was going on an official visitation to
america, especially to the west indies; and that he and schulius were
the missionaries promised by count zinzendorf for work among the negroes
in carolina. the general courteously invited them to confer with him
further, either by letter or in person, and offered to take them with
him, as he expected shortly to sail for georgia with his regiment.

later, when they wished to come to a definite agreement with oglethorpe,
who represented the associates of dr. bray, they experienced some
difficulty, owing to the fact that a letter of introduction oglethorpe
expected to receive from count zinzendorf had failed to arrive, but the
exhibition of their passports, and richters explanation that zinzendorf
thought (from newspaper notices) that oglethorpe had already left
england, enabled boehler and schulius to establish their identity. so
soon as zinzendorf heard that his word was needed, he sent them a formal
letter of introduction to oglethorpe, which was gladly received as
corroboration of their statements. the moravians were at their own
expense while waiting in london, but oglethorpe promised that they
should be provided with bibles, grammars, and other things they might
need for the negro school.

being detained in london for three months, instead of three weeks as
they expected, boehler and his friend had ample opportunity to make
acquaintances in the metropolis. they sent word of their arrival
to those germans who had learned to know zinzendorf and the earlier
moravian emigrants to georgia, and on the first sunday the brethren,
(as they affectionately called all who, like themselves, were interested
in living a christian life,) came to them, and a series of meetings
for prayer, conference, and instruction was begun. boehler was a man of
attractive personality, and convincing earnestness, and in spite of his
slight knowledge of their language many english also became interested
and formed a society similar to that begun by zinzendorf, the two soon
uniting in the fetter lane society.

ten days after boehler reached london he accepted an invitation from
the two wesleys, and went with them to oxford. there he was most kindly
received, preached in latin once or twice each day, and had many private
conversations with inquirers. among those with whom he became acquainted
was the rev. john gambold, who later became a bishop in the moravian
church, and many others were mightily stirred to seek the salvation of
their souls.

noting how little english boehler and schulius knew, gen. oglethorpe
offered them a boy who was bright and intelligent, could speak both
english and german, and understood some french, and they found him so
serviceable that they asked and obtained permission to take him with
them to carolina.

through wesley, boehler heard that gen. oglethorpe was much surprised at
the speed with which he acquired english, and that he had asked whether
boehler would consent to serve as minister of the church of england
in savannah, if that congregation remained without a pastor. boehler
expressed his willingness to preach at any time, but declined to
administer the sacraments for any denomination except his own, so the
appointment was not made.

on the 28th of april, the baggage of the missionaries was put aboard the
union galley, capt. moberley, with instructions that boehler and his
companions should join her at portsmouth. neisser was to go with them
to georgia, and from there, as opportunity offered, to st. thomas, but
while the ship lay at portsmouth other instructions reached him, and
oglethorpe kindly made no objection to his withdrawing his box and
staying behind, though he did not quite understand it.

on the 15th of may, peter boehler, george schulius, and the lad simon
peter harper, left london, but finding the ship not yet ready to sail,
they, by oglethorpes instructions, went to southampton where some of
the vessels were lying.

returning to portsmouth they embarked on may 22nd, and soon found they
were to dwell in sodom and gomorrah during their voyage. on the 30th
the fleet sailed to southampton for the soldiers, and when they came
aboard four days later sodom and gomorrah were fully reproduced. as
the ships lay off spithead a conspiracy was discovered,--the soldiers
on one vessel had planned to kill their officers, take what money they
could find, and escape to france. during the voyage there were several
fights among the soldiers, or between them and the sailors, and in one
drunken riot a soldier cut off a young girls hand. the lord was our
defense and shield, and we were among them like daniel in the midst of
the lions, wrote boehler, for the quiet, bible-reading moravians found
little to like in their rough associates, who cared for them just as
little, and wished they could be thrown overboard.

the ships put to sea july 16th and reached the madeiras on the 29th,
where they were detained until the 8th of august. boehler and schulius
went on shore a number of times, were courteously treated by the most
prominent catholic priest there, climbed a mountain for the exercise,
and particularly enjoyed their escape from turmoil and confusion. the
captain, who had taken a dislike to them, tried to prevent their leaving
the ship, but oglethorpe stood their friend, and ordered that they
should have entire liberty. for boehler, as for many who had preceded
him, georgia and carolina were to be a school where great life lessons
would be learned. fresh from the university halls of jena, he had met
the students of oxford on equal footing, quickly winning their respect
and admiration, but these soldiers and sailors, restless, eager for
excitement, rude and unlettered, were a new thing to him, a book written
in a language to which he had no key. later he would learn to find some
point of contact with the unlearned as well as the learned, with
the negro slave and the yorkshire collier as well as the student of
theology, but just now his impulse was to hold himself aloof and let
their wild spirits dash against him like waves about the base of a
lighthouse which sends a clear, strong beam across the deep, but has few
rays for the tossing billows just beneath.

on the 18th of september land was sighted, and on the 29th the fleet
anchored in the harbor of st. simons island, and with grateful hearts
the moravians watched the landing of the soldiers. on the 4th of october
they transferred their baggage to a sloop bound for savannah, which
sailed the 6th, but on account of head winds did not reach savannah
until the 16th. the moravians still at savannah came in a boat to
welcome them, and take them to their house, but boehler was anxious to
see the scene of his future labors, and stayed in town only a few days,
leaving on the 21st for a tour through carolina. schulius accompanied
him all the way, and several others as far as the indian town where
rose was living with his wife and child. here they talked of many things
regarding the savannah congregation, but on the following afternoon
the missionaries went on their way, zeisberger, haberland, boehner and
regnier accompanying them to purisburg.

there boehler and schulius lodged with one of the swiss who had come to
georgia with spangenberg and the first company. his wife expressed the
wish that the moravians in savannah would take her thirteen-year-old
daughter the following winter, and give her instruction, for which she
would gladly pay. boehler took occasion to speak to the couple about
salvation and the saviour, and they appeared to be moved. indeed this
was the main theme of all his conversations. to the owners of the
plantations visited, he spoke of their personal needs, and their
responsibility for the souls of their slaves; while to the slaves he
told the love of god, filling them with wonder, for most of them
were newly imported from the wilds of africa, and suspicious even of
kindness. many knew little of the english tongue, and the few who could
understand his words had not yet learned that there was a god who cared
how they lived or what became of them. their masters, as a rule, thought
the missionaries were attempting an almost hopeless task in trying to
lift these negroes above the brute creation, but were quite willing
to give permission and an opportunity to reach them, and on this tour
boehler found only one land-owner who refused his consent.

purisburg had been named as the location of the negro school, but
boehler found there were very few negroes in the town, which had been
largely settled by swiss, who had not prospered greatly and had bought
few slaves. the nearest plantation employing negroes was five miles
distant, and only seven lived there, so the outlook was far from
encouraging at that point.

boehler and schulius then made their way from one plantation to another,
until they reached charlestown. the rev. mr. garden, to whom they had
a letter of introduction, advised that the school should be begun
in charlestown, where there was a large negro population, perhaps
a thousand souls. this was more than could be found on any single
plantation in carolina, and as the slaves were strictly forbidden to
go from one plantation to another it would hardly be possible to find
another place where so many could be reached at the same time. boehler
and schulius were much impressed with the advantages offered, especially
as mr. garden promised all the assistance he could give, and they
debated whether schulius should not stay and begin at once, while
boehler returned to report to oglethorpe. the lot was finally tried, and
the direction received that they should carefully study the situation
but wait until later to commence work. therefore on the 1st of november
the two companions set out for savannah, which they reached in eight
days.

the following weeks were a sore trial for the missionaries. with a
promising field in sight, and eager to commence work in it, they were
obliged to wait for oglethorpes permission, and oglethorpe was very
busy on the frontier establishing the outposts for which his regiment
had been brought over. when he did return to savannah, it was only for
a few hours, and he was in no frame of mind for a long argument of pros
and cons. he told boehler rather testily that they should not go to
charlestown with his consent; that if they were not willing to follow
the plan for purisburg he would have nothing more to do with them; and
that if they wanted to talk further they must wait till he came again.

boehler and schulius wished themselves free to proceed without his
consent, wished they had not entered into an agreement with the
associates of the late dr. bray, but under the circumstances felt
themselves bound to give the work at purisburg a fair trial. in
december, schulius went to purisburg to look over the field, and make
acquaintance with the people, while boehler waited at savannah for
oglethorpe, and finally, when his patience was quite exhausted, followed
the general to st. simons. oglethorpe persisted in his intention to have
the school at purisburg, and when he learned that his wishes would be
obeyed he gave instructions for the renting of a large house and two
acres of ground, and for supplies to be furnished from the store at
savannah.

in february, 1739, therefore, boehler and schulius settled in purisburg.
young harper seems to have been with them in purisburg on some of their
earlier visits, but was sent temporarily to savannah, and as he does
not reappear in the records, he probably went back to his english home.
david zeisberger, jr., joined boehler and was his willing helper in many
ways.

at first the outlook was rather more promising than they expected. there
were very few colored children for the school, but daily more were
bought and born, there was some interest aroused among the older
negroes, and the owners were disposed to be friendly, and allow the
missionaries free access to their slaves. the german and swiss settlers
were unaffectedly glad to have the moravians in their midst, and begged
for religious services, and instruction for their children, so boehler
and schulius agreed on a division of labor, the latter to devote himself
to the white residents and their little ones, while boehler spent most
of his time visiting adjoining plantations.

but when the warm weather came boehler was taken with fever, and from
june to october he suffered severely. from time to time he was able to
be up, and even to visit savannah, but he was so weak and his feet
were so badly swollen that walking was very difficult, and of course
missionary tours were impossible.

on the 4th of august, george schulius died, after an illness of eighteen
days duration. boehler was in savannah when he was taken sick, but
returned in time to nurse him, to soothe him in delirium, and to lay him
to rest amid the lamentations of the purisburg residents. at his death
the school for white children was given up, for boehler was too weak to
shoulder the additional load, and felt that his first duty was to
the negroes. in september, oglethorpe was in savannah, and after much
difficulty boehler obtained speech with him, and succeeded in convincing
him that a negro school at purisburg was hopeless. he approved of
boehlers plan to itinerate among the plantations and promised that
both his own and schulius salaries should be paid him, that he might
be supplied for traveling expenses. in november, when his health was
restored, boehler wished to make his first journey, but the storekeeper
declined to pay him any money until the expiration of the quarter year.
when he went again at the appointed time the storekeeper refused to pay
anything without a new order from oglethorpe, except the remainder of
the first years salary, now long overdue. boehler concluded that the
man had received private instructions from oglethorpe, and that
his services were no longer desired by the representative of the
associates, so in january, 1740, he gave up further thought of
obligation to them, and prepared to go on his own account. he planned
to go by boat to purisburg and from there on foot through carolina
to charlestown, but on the way up the savannah river the canoe was
overtaken by a severe thunderstorm, and forced to land. knowing that a
sloop would sail in two days he returned to savannah, meaning to go to
charlestown on her, but on trying the lot he received direction to wait
for the present in savannah.

while boehler was making his attempt among the negroes, some changes
were taking place in the savannah congregation. he had been very much
distressed by the condition he found when he arrived, for owing partly
to their many difficulties and partly to seiferts absence among the
indians, no communion had been celebrated for a year, and the bands
 had been dropped. the bible and prayer gatherings were steadily
observed, but it seemed to him there was a lack of harmony among the
members, and they were by no means ready to take him at once into their
confidence. seifert, too, was not well, and had been obliged to leave
the indians, and return to savannah.

the indian work was most discouraging, for the men were careless and
drunken, and in january, 1739, even rose gave up, and moved back to
savannah with his family. in october, tomochichi died, and was buried
with great pomp in percival square in savannah. the moravians were asked
to furnish music at the funeral, but declined, and it was hardly missed
amid the firing of minute guns, and three volleys over his grave. after
his death his little village was abandoned, and the question of further
missionary efforts there settled itself.

during the winter john regnier became deeply incensed at some plain
speaking from schulius, and decided to leave at once for europe, the
congregation paying his way. he probably went to herrnhut, as that had
been his intention some months previously, and later he served as a
missionary in surinam. in after years he returned to pennsylvania, where
he joined those who were inimical to the moravians.

peter rose, his wife and daughter left for pennsylvania soon after their
withdrawal from irene. they settled in germantown, and there peter died
march 12th, 1740. catherine married john michael huber in 1742, who died
five years later on a voyage to the west indies. being for the third
time a widow, she became one of the first occupants of the widows house
in bethlehem, and served as a deaconess for many years, dying in 1798.
mary magdalena became the wife of rev. paul peter bader in 1763.

on august 10th, 1739, john michael schober died after a brief illness,
the ninth of the moravian colonists to find their final resting place
beside the savannah river.

in september, general oglethorpe received instructions to make reprisals
on the spanish for their depredations on the southern borders of the
georgia province. he rightly judged this to be the precursor of open
hostilities, and hastened his preparations to put carolina and georgia
in a state of defense. in october the british government declared war on
spain, and november witnessed the beginning of fighting in the colonies.
of course this meant a re-opening of the old discussion as to the
moravians liability for service, a repetition of the old arguments, and
a renewal of the popular indignation. oglethorpe was fairly considerate
of them, thought zinzendorf ought to have provided for two men,
but added that he did not want the moravians driven away. still
the situation was uncomfortable, and the moravians began to make
arrangements for their final departure.

by this time boehler had won his way into the confidence of the savannah
congregation, and had learned that he was not the only one who had the
lords interests at heart. with seifert again in charge of affairs,
the religious services had taken on new life, and on october 18th, john
martin mack was confirmed. judith toeltschig, however, gave them great
concern, and her brother michael haberland sided with her, so that the
company gladly saw them sail for germany in the latter part of january,
1740. there michael married, and returned to america in may, 1749, as
one of the large company which came to settle in bethlehem, where he
died in 1783. judith joined her husband in england, and in 1742 was
serving as sick-waiter of the pilgrim congregation in london.

this left only six moravians in savannah, for john boehner had already
started for pennsylvania on january 20th. he had a very sore arm which
they hoped would be benefited by the change, and he was commissioned to
try and gather together the members who had preceded him, and to make
arrangements for the reception of the remnant which was soon to follow.
he aided faithfully during the early days of the settlement at nazareth
and bethlehem, and in 1742 went as a missionary to the island of st.
thomas, where he labored earnestly and successfully for the rest of his
life, and died in 1787.

nothing now remained for the members still in savannah, but to so
arrange matters that they might leave on the first opportunity.
oglethorpe had already bought their trumpets and french horns at a good
price, but they needed to sell their rice and household furniture to
provide sufficient funds for their journey. this was happily arranged
on the 2nd of february, when george whitefield, who had reached savannah
for the second time a few days before, came to see them, promised to buy
all they cared to sell, and offered them free passage to pennsylvania.
this offer they gratefully accepted, receiving 37 pounds for their
household goods, and on april 13th, 1740, they sailed with whitefield
on his sloop the savannah, captain thomas gladman. their land and
improvements were left in the hands of an agent, and the town house was
rented to some of whitefields followers for a hospital.

with the moravians went the two boys, benjamin somers and james ----, who
had been given into their hands by the savannah magistrates in 1735, and
a young woman, johanna hummel, of purisburg. the two lads gave them much
trouble in pennsylvania, and benjamin was finally bound out in 1748,
while james ran away. johanna married john boehner, and sailed with him
to the west indies in 1742, but died at sea before reaching there.

boehler and his company expected to find spangenberg and bishop
nitschmann in pennsylvania, and were much disappointed to learn that
both were absent. they scarcely knew what to do, but boehler held them
together, and when whitefield decided to buy a large tract of land and
build thereon a negro school, and a town for his english friends of
philanthropic mind, and when the moravians were offered the task of
erecting the first house there, boehler and his companions gladly
accepted the work. bethlehem followed in due time, and all were among
those who organized that congregation. david zeisberger, sr., died there
in 1744, his wife in 1746. anton seifert was appointed elder, or pastor
of the bethlehem congregation, married, and took an active part in the
church and school work there and at nazareth, the latter tract having
been purchased from whitefield in 1741. april 8th, 1745, he sailed for
europe, laboring in england, ireland and holland, and dying at zeist in
1785.

john martin mack became one of the leaders of the moravian church in its
mission work among the indians in new york, connecticut and ohio until
1760, when he was sent to the negro slaves on st. thomas, preaching also
on st. croix and st. jan, and the english west indies. he was ordained
to the ministry november 13th, 1742, and was consecrated bishop october
18th, 1770, during a visit to pennsylvania, this being the first
episcopal consecration in the american province of the moravian church.
he was married four times, his last wife passing away two years before
his departure. he died june 9th, 1784, and was buried in the presence
of a great concourse of people,--negro converts, planters, government
officers and the governor-general.

david zeisberger, jr., lived a life so abundant in labors, so
picturesque in experiences that a brief outline utterly fails to give
any conception of it. the apostle of the western indians traversed
massachusetts and connecticut, new york, pennsylvania and ohio, entered
michigan and canada, preaching to many nations in many tongues. he
brought the gospel to the mohicans and wampanoags, to the nanticokes
and shawanese, to the chippewas, ottowas and wyandots, to the unamis,
unalachtgos and monseys of the delaware race, to the onondagas, cayugas
and senecas of the six nations. speaking the delaware language fluently,
as well as the mohawk and onondaga dialects of the iroquois; familiar
with the cayuga and other tongues; an adopted sachem of the six nations;
naturalized among the monseys by a formal act of the tribe; swaying for
a number of years the grand council of the delawares; at one time keeper
of the archives of the iroquois confederacy; versed in the customs of
the aborigines; adapting himself to their mode of thought, and, by long
habit, a native in many of his ways;--no protestant missionary and few
men of any other calling, ever exercised more real influence and
was more sincerely honored among the indians; and no one, except the
catholic evangelists, with whom the form of baptism was the end of
their work, exceeded him in the frequency and hardships of his journeys
through the wilderness, the numbers whom he received into the church
of christ, and brought to a consistent practice of christianity, and
conversion of characters most depraved, ferocious and desperate. nor
must we look upon zeisberger as a missionary only; he was one of the
most notable pioneers of civilization our country has ever known. * * *
thirteen villages sprang up at his bidding, where native agents prepared
the way for the husbandman and the mechanic of the coming race. he was
not only bold in god, fearless and full of courage, but also lowly of
heart, meek of spirit, never thinking highly of himself. selfishness was
unknown to him. his heart poured out a stream of love to his fellowmen.
in a word, his character was upright, honest, loving and noble, as free
from faults as can be expected of any man this side of the grave. *


    * life and times of david zeisberger, by rt. rev. edmund
     de schweinitz.--

he died at goshen, ohio, nov. 17th, 1808, having labored among the
indians for sixty years.

like spangenberg, peter boehlers story belongs to the whole moravian
church, rather than to the georgia colony. his time was divided
between england and america, in both of which spheres he labored most
successfully. jan. 10th, 1748, he was consecrated bishop at marienborn,
germany. after zinzendorfs death he helped frame the new church
constitution, and in 1769 was elected to the governing board of the
entire unitas fratrum. he died in london, april 20th, 1774, having been
there for a year on a visitation to the english congregations of the
moravian church.




chapter vii. conclusion.



  later attempts in georgia.

            1740.

may 18th, 1740, john hagen arrived in savannah. he had come over
intending to go as missionary to the cherokees, and his disappointment
in finding that the moravians had abandoned georgia is another example
of the enormous difficulty under which mission work was conducted in
those days, when the most momentous events might transpire months before
the authorities at home could be apprised of them.

hagen had become very ill on the way from charleston to savannah,
and with none of his own people to turn to he bethought himself of
whitefields offers of friendship, and went to his house. he was kindly
received by those who were living there, and though he went down to the
gates of death the portals did not open, and he rapidly regained his
health.

visiting irene he found only a few indian women, for tomochichi was
dead, and the men were all on the warpath. the opportunity of going to
the cherokees seemed very doubtful, for there were none living nearer
than three hundred miles, and distances looked much greater in the
georgia forests than in his own populous germany. so he concluded to
accept the kind offers of whitefields household, and stay with them,
making himself useful in the garden, and doing such religious work as
he was able. several germans living in the town, who had learned to like
the moravians, asked him to hold services for them, to which he gladly
agreed.

he was much pleased with the prospect for work in savannah, where the
people had been greatly stirred by whitefields preaching, and he wrote
to herrnhut urging that two married couples be sent to help reap the
harvest, a request warmly seconded by whitefield, who had returned to
savannah on june 16th. whitefield reported the moravians busily engaged
in erecting a negro school-house for him in pennsylvania, and told hagen
he would like to have the two couples come to assist him in carrying out
his large plans for georgia.

but by the 14th of august this invitation had been withdrawn, hagen
had left whitefields house, and had been refused work on whitefields
plantation, for fear that he might contaminate the whitefield converts.
the trouble arose over a discussion on predestination,--not the first or
last time this has happened,--and the two men found themselves utterly
at variance, for whitefield held the extreme calvinistic view, while
hagen argued that all men who would might be saved. hagen therefore went
to the home of john brownfield, who shared his views, and made him
very welcome, and from there carried on his work among the residents of
savannah and purisburg.

whitefield returned to pennsylvania in november, 1740, nursing his
wrath against hagen, and finding boehler to be of the same mind,
he peremptorily ordered the moravians to leave his land. neighbors
interfered, and cried shame on him for turning the little company adrift
in the depth of winter, and he finally agreed to let them stay for
a while in the log cabin which was sheltering them while they were
building the large stone house. the opportune arrival of bishop
nitschmann and his company, and the purchase of the bethlehem tract,
soon relieved them from their uncomfortable position, and later the
nazareth tract was bought from whitefield, and the work they had begun
for him was completed for their own use.

whitefield, in after years, rather excused himself for his first
harshness toward the moravians, but a letter written by him to a friend
in 1742, is a good statement of the armed truce which existed among the
great religious leaders of that day. where the spirit of god is in any
great degree, there will be union of avail, tho there may be difference
in sentiments. this i have learnt, my dear brother, by happy experience,
and find great freedom and peace in my soul thereby. this makes me love
the moravian brethren tho i cannot agree with them in many of their
principles. i cannot look upon them as willful deceivers, but as persons
who hazard their lives for the sake of the gospel. mr. wesley is as
certainly wrong in some things as they, and mr. law as wrong also. yet
i believe both mr. law and mr. wesley and count zinzendorf will shine
bright in glory. i have not given way to the moravian brethren, nor any
other who i thought were in the wrong, no, not for one hour. but i think
it best not to dispute when there is no probability of convincing.

hagen remained in savannah until february, 1742, when he went to
bethlehem, accompanied by abraham bueninger, of purisburg, who entered
the moravian ministry in 1742, and labored among the indians, the white
settlers, and in the west indies.

nine more residents of georgia followed the moravians to bethlehem in
1745, john brownfield, james burnside and his daughter rebecca, henry
ferdinand beck, his wife barbara, their daughter maria christina, and
their sons jonathan and david, all of savannah, and anna catharine
kremper, of purisburg. all of these served faithfully in various
important offices, and were valuable fruit of the efforts in georgia.

john hagen was appointed warden of the nazareth congregation, when it
was organized; and died at shamokin in 1747.

            1746.

general oglethorpe was much impressed by the industry of the moravians
in savannah, and was sorry to see them leave the province. in october,
1746, therefore, he proposed to count zinzendorf that a new attempt
should be made further up the savannah river. he offered to give them
five hundred and twenty-six acres near purisburg, and to arrange for
two men to be stationed in augusta, either as licensed traders, for many
indians came there, or as schoolmasters.

zinzendorf thought well of the plan, and accepted the tract, which
oglethorpe deeded to him nov. 1st, 1746, the land lying on the carolina
side of the savannah river, adjoining the township of purisburg, where
boehler and schulius had made many friends.

no colonists, however, were sent over, and the title to the land lapsed
for lack of occupancy, as that to old fort, on the ogeechee, had already
done.

            1774.

early in 1774, mr. knox, under-secretary of state in london, asked for
missionaries to preach the gospel to the slaves on his plantation in
georgia. he offered a small piece of land, whereon they might live
independently, and promised ample store of provisions.

this time the plan was carried into execution, and ludwig mueller,
formerly teacher in the pedagogium at niesky, with john george wagner as
his companion, went to england, and sailed from there to georgia.
they settled on mr. knoxs plantation, and at once began to visit
and instruct the slaves, and preach to the whites living in the
neighborhood. knoxborough lay on a creek about sixteen miles from
savannah, midway between that town and ebenezer. the land had been
settled by germans, salzburgers and wittenbergers, and mr. knox had
bought up their fifty acre tracts, combining them into a large rice
plantation. the homes of the germans had been allowed to fall into ruin,
the overseer occupying a three-roomed house, with an outside kitchen.
mueller was given a room in the overseers house, preaching there to the
white neighbors who chose to hear him, and to the negroes in the large
shed that sheltered the stamping mill. wagner occupied a room cut off
from the kitchen.

in february, 1775, frederick william marshall, agent of the unitas
fratrum on the wachovia tract in north carolina, (with headquarters
at salem) visited georgia to inspect the moravian property there,
accompanied by andrew broesing, who joined mueller and wagner in their
missionary work. it had been suggested that the moravians preach in a
church at a little place called goshen, near knoxborough, a church
which had been built by subscriptions of germans and english living
in the neighborhood, and had been used occasionally by a preacher from
ebenezer.

at this time the salzburgers were in a very bad condition. bolzius had
died in 1765, and rabenhorst and triebner, who shared the pastorate,
were greatly at variance, so that the entire settlement was split into
factions. dr. muehlenberg, the father of lutheranism in pennsylvania,
had come to settle the difficulties, and heard with much displeasure of
the plan to have the moravians preach at goshen. he declared,--i doubt
not, according to their known method of insinuation, they will gain the
most, if not all the remaining families in goshen, and will also make an
attempt on ebenezer, for their ways are well adapted to awakened
souls. i have learned by experience that where strife and disunion
have occurred in neighborhoods and congregations among the germans in
america, there black and white apostles have immediately appeared, and
tried to fish in the troubled waters, like eagles which have a keen
sight and smell.

dr. muehlenberg was too much prejudiced against the moravians to judge
them fairly, for he belonged to the halle party in germany, and in
pennsylvania had clashed with zinzendorf during the latters residence
there. the lutheran church was in no way endangered by the preaching of
the missionaries, for their instructions were explicit: if you have an
opportunity to preach the gospel to german or english residents use
it gladly, but receive none into your congregation, for you are sent
expressly to the negroes. you will probably find some of the so-called
salzburgers there, with their ministers. with them you will in all
fairness do only that to which you are invited by their pastor. you will
do nothing in their congregation that you would not like to have another
do in yours. dr. muehlenberg, therefore, might safely have left them
free to preach the gospel where they would, even to his own distracted
flock, which was weakened by dissensions, suffered severely in the
revolutionary war, and gradually scattered into the adjoining country.

in accordance with his instructions, mueller at once gave up all idea of
using the goshen church, and occupied himself with those who heard him
gladly at knoxborough. after a careful examination of the land, the
moravians decided not to build a house for themselves, but to continue
with the overseer, who was kind to them, and gave mueller the use of a
horse for his visits to adjoining plantations.

james habersham, who had come over with george whitefield in 1738, was
one of the most prominent men in savannah at this time. in 1744 he had
established a commercial house in georgia, the first of its kind, to
ship lumber, hogs, skins, etc., to england, and this business had been a
success. he had taken a great interest in whitefields orphan house, and
had been active in governmental affairs, having served as secretary of
the province, president of the council, and acting governor of georgia.
for many years he had been the agent in charge of the moravian lots in
and near savannah, and now, in failing health, and a sufferer from gout,
he asked that one of the missionaries might be sent to his three estates
on the ogeechee river, partly as his representative and partly to
instruct the slaves. it was decided that wagner should accept this
invitation and go to silkhope, while mueller and broesing remained at
knoxborough, mueller preaching at silkhope every two weeks.

marshall was much pleased with the reception accorded him and the
missionaries, and hoped the time was coming for again using the lots in
savannah, but the hope again proved to be fallacious. the missionaries
all suffered greatly from fever, always prevalent on the rice
plantations in the summer, and on oct. 11th, 1775, mueller died. the
outbreak of the revolutionary war made wagners and broesings position
precarious, for the english act exempting the moravians from military
service was not likely to be respected by the americans, and in 1776
broesing returned to wachovia, where the moravians had settled in
sufficient numbers to hold their own, though amid trials manifold.
wagner stayed in georgia until 1779, and then he too left the field, and
returned to england.


  the savannah lands.

in january, 1735, fifty acres of savannah land was granted by the
trustees of georgia to august gottlieb spangenberg, who was going
to georgia as the leader of the first company of moravian colonists.
spangenberg had the habit of speaking of himself as brother joseph
 in his diaries, and in the records he sometimes appears as joseph
spangenberg, sometimes as joseph augustus gottlieb spangenberg, and
sometimes by his true name only. according to custom, the fifty acre
grant embraced three lots,--town lot no. 4, second tything, anson ward,
in the town of savannah, farm lot no. 2, second tything, anson ward, in
the township of savannah, and garden lot no. 120, east. (office of the
secretary of state of georgia, book d of grants, folio 208.)

a few days later a similar grant was made to david nitschmann, count
zinzendorfs hausmeister, generally known as the syndic from his office
in later years, who had conducted the first company from herrnhut to
london. this grant consisted of town lot no. 3, second tything, anson
ward, in the town of savannah, farm lot no. 3, second tything, anson
ward, in the township of savannah, and garden lot no. 121 east. (office
of the secretary of state of georgia, book d of grants, folio 207.)

when the moravians left georgia in 1740, these lots were placed in
the hands of an agent, probably james habersham, who was acting as
whitefields assistant in his hospital and charity school, the moravian
house being rented for the former purpose.

when the trustees of georgia surrendered their charter to the english
crown in 1754, it was found that no formal deeds had ever been made for
many of the tracts granted by the trustees, and it was decreed that any
who could legally claim land under grant from the trustees should have
their rights confirmed by royal grant upon application to the governor
and council of georgia, within a specified time, the land otherwise to
be considered forfeited. in june, 1761, habersham wrote to bethlehem
that the time for entering claim had expired, but that he had asked for
and obtained six months grace for the moravians, who had previously sent
him a full power of attorney, which had failed to reach him.

a new power of attorney was at once sent, and on september 7th, 1762,
royal patents were issued to nitschmann and spangenberg, for the town
lots and farm lots above mentioned. (registers office, book d, folios
207 and 208.)

meanwhile the two garden lots had been sold to sir james wright for 10
pounds, and deeds, bearing date of march 15th, 1762, were made to him
by spangenberg and nitschmann. the deeds to the town and farm lots were
deposited in bethlehem, and the agent took his instructions from the
manager there.

in 1765 bishop ettwein went from bethlehem to savannah to look after the
property. he found that the large house on spangenbergs lot had been
condemned as ruinous and pulled down. some one had built a small house
on the other end of the same lot, and it was supposed to pay 4 pounds
a year ground rent, but the family living there was very poor, and
habersham had been unable to collect anything. by permission a
poor woman had fenced in the nitschmann lot, and was using it as a
kitchen-garden, rent free. the title to the farm lots was in jeopardy,
for a certain alderman becker in london claimed that the trustees
had given him a tract, including these and many other farms, but the
settlers thereon were making a strong fight to hold their property, in
which they were finally successful.

at the time of frederick william marshalls visit to savannah in 1775,
the two farm lots were reported to have some good timber, even if they
were not of much use otherwise, and the town lots had increased in value
with the growth of the town. marshall thought the latter could again
be used for residence, and as a centre for such missionary work as was
already begun by mueller, wagner and broesing, but the revolutionary war
put an end to their efforts.

at this point in the records appears a peculiar uncertainty as to the
identity of the owner of the david nitschmann lots. the fact that there
were three david nitschmanns in the active service of the moravian
church during a number of years after its renewal in herrnhut affords
ample opportunity for confusion, but one would not expect to find it
in the minds of their contemporaries. but even such a man as frederick
william marshall wrote, the deeds to these two lots, nos. 3 and 4, are
kept in bethlehem (one stands in the name of brother joseph, the other
of bishop dd nitschmann, who passed away in bethlehem) and it would
be well if something were done about them. i do not know what can be
arranged with the son of the latter; but brother david nitschmann, who
is now in zeist, said when he was in america that he himself was the
david nitschmann in whose name the grant was made, because he was the
one who had shared in the negotiations with the trustees of georgia.
 bishop david nitschmann had died in bethlehem, oct. 9th, 1772, where his
son immanuel lived until 1790. the david nitschmann residing in zeist
was the syndic, formerly count zinzendorfs hausmeister, the leader
of the first company to london, where he and spangenberg had arranged
matters with the trustees, and had each received fifty acres of land in
his own name. the bishop had had nothing whatever to do with the matter,
and this was the conclusion reached, for the title to the town lot no.
3 passed at the syndics death, march 28th, 1779, to his son christian
david nitschmann.

june 14th, 1784, august gottlieb spangenberg and christian david
nitschmann by deed transferred their title to the savannah property to
hans christian alexander von schweinitz, administrator of the estate of
the unitas fratrum in pennsylvania.

the revolutionary war had come and gone, and von schweinitz began again
to investigate the condition of affairs in savannah. their agent, james
habersham, had died in 1775, but his son james had kept up the taxes,
so the title was intact. but there is a matter, he wrote, which it
is necessary you should be made acquainted with. when the british troops
took possession of savannah, they had occasion for a lot belonging to
a mr. george kellar, for the purpose of erecting a fort on, it being
situated in the outskirts of the town, and in order to satisfy this man
they very generously gave him your two lots in lieu of the one they had
taken from him, but very fortunately for you, our legislature passed
a law rendering null and void all their acts during the time they
held this country, and notwithstanding mr. kellar is perfectly well
acquainted with this matter, he has moved a house on one of the lots,
and on the other he has lately built another house, which he rents out,
and holds possession--in defiance of me, as i am possessed of no power
of attorney to warrant any proceeding against him. a power of attorney
was at once sent habersham, with instructions to evict the intruder, and
rent, lease or sell the property.

a suit against the trespasser was won in 1794, but in 1801 his tenant
was still in possession, poor, and refusing to pay rent. habersham
had meanwhile died, and john gebhard cunow, acting as attorney for
von schweinitz, who had returned to germany in 1798, requested matthew
mcallister to take charge of the matter; but mcallister, having made
some inquiries, reported that the man named john robinson, who lived on
the premises, was likely to make trouble, and that as he himself was the
only judge in the district it would be better to put the case into the
hands of some one else, and leave him free to hear it. cunow therefore
asked george woodruff to act as attorney, to which he agreed, requesting
that john lawson be associated with him, which was done the following
year.

hans christian alexander von schweinitz died feb. 26th, 1802, the title
to the savannah lots passing by will to christian lewis benzien, of
salem, north carolina, who however requested cunow to continue to look
after them.

the agents had no light task in ejecting john robinson and his wife from
their abode, for he was a foolish, drunken man, and she a perfect
virago, and the sheriff is really afraid of her, but on july 5th,
1805, lawson wrote to cunow,--i am happy to inform you that after
great trouble and difficulty we have this day obtained possession of mr.
benziens lots.

feb. 17th, 1807, christian lewis benzien, by his attorneys woodruff and
lawson, conveyed town lot no. 4, second tything, anson ward, to charles
odingsell, the consideration being $1,500, one hundred dollars in cash,
the rest secured by bond and mortgage, payable in one, two, and three
years, with 8 per cent interest from date.

in the same manner town lot no. 3 was sold to worthington gale, march
14th, 1807, for $1,450.

owing to the distress of the times, payment of these bonds was
slightly delayed, but by june, 1811, both were cancelled.

although the two town lots thus brought $2,950, they had cost a good
deal in taxes and attorneys fees, and it is doubtful whether the
general treasury profited greatly by the investment, and certainly
the men who had lived and labored and suffered in georgia were in no
financial way enriched thereby.

christian lewis benzien died nov. 13th, 1811, and the two farm lots
were transferred by will to john gebhard cunow of bethlehem, pa., who in
march, 1822, deeded them to lewis david de schweinitz of bethlehem, pa.

and here the two farm lots disappear from the records. they had never
been available for farming purposes, and by degrees the timber was
stolen from them, so that it became wiser to let them go than to keep
up the taxes with no prospect of return. in course of time the title
lapsed, and the land passed uncontested into other hands.


     arrivals, departures, deaths.

         arrivals in georgia.

   april  6th, 1735.  august gottlieb spangenberg         from germany.
                   john toeltschig                            
          7th,       peter rose                                 
                    gotthard demuth                            
                    gottfried haberecht                        
                    anton seifert                              
                    michael haberland                          
                    george haberland                           
                    george waschke                             
                    friedrich riedel                           
    oct.  11th,       john regnier                        from pennsylvania.
   feb.  17th, 1736.  david nitschmann, (the bishop)      from germany.
        23rd,       christian adolph von hermsdorf             
                    henry roscher                              
                    john andrew dober                          
                    maria catharine dober,                     
                         (wife of andrew d.)
                   george neisser                             
                    augustin neisser                           
                    david zeisberger                           
                    rosina zeisberger, (wife of david z.)      
                    david tanneberger                          
                    john tanneberger, (son of david t.)        
                    david jag                                  
                    john michael meyer                         
                    jacob frank                                
                    john martin mack                           
                    matthias seybold                           
                    gottlieb demuth                            
                    john boehner                               
                    matthias boehnisch                         
                    regina demuth, (wife of gotthard d.)       
                    judith toeltschig, (wife of john t.)       
                    catharine riedel,                          
                         (wife of friedrich r.)
                   anna waschke, (mother of george w.)        
                    juliana jaeschke                           
                    rosina haberecht,                          
                         (wife of gottfried h.)
   sept. 16th, 1737.  anna catherina rose,
                      maria magdalena rose, (daughters of peter r.)
   jan.  28th, 1738.  david zeisberger, jr.               from holland.
                   john michael schober                       
    oct.  16th,       peter boehler,                      from germany.
                        (missionary to negroes)
                   george schulius,                           
                         (assistant missionary)
                   simon peter harper                  from england.
   may   18th, 1740.  john hagen                          from germany.
   autumn,     1774.  ludwig mueller                             
                     john george wagner                         
    march  5th, 1775.  andrew broesing                     from north carolina.

         departures from georgia.

   march 15th, 1736.  august gottlieb spangenberg         to pennsylvania.
        26th,       bishop david nitschmann                     
    dec.   2nd,       john andrew dober                   to germany.
                   maria catherine dober                    
    march  9th, 1737.  george neisser                      to pennsylvania.
   may   16th,       christian adolph von hermsdorf      to germany.
   oct.  16th,       david tanneberger                   to pennsylvania.
                   john tanneberger                            
                    john michael meyer                          
                    gottfried haberecht                         
    end of jan. 1738.  gotthard demuth                             
                     regina demuth                               
                     george waschke                              
                     juliana waschke                             
                     anna waschke                                
                     augustin neisser                            
                     gottlieb demuth                             
                     david jag                                   
    march 12th,       john toeltschig                     to europe.
   summer,           matthias seybold                    to pennsylvania.
   winter,  1738-39.  john francis regnier                to germany.
               1739.  peter rose                          to pennsylvania.
                     catherine rose                              
                      maria magdalena rose                        
                      simon peter harper                  unknown.
   jan.  20th, 1740.  john boehner                        to pennsylvania.
   jan.,             judith toeltschig                   to germany.
                    michael haberland                        
    april 13th,       peter boehler                       to pennsylvania.
                   anton seifert                               
                    john martin mack                            
                    david zeisberger                            
                    rosina zeisberger                           
                    david zeisberger, jr.                       
                    benjamin somers                             
                    james ----                                  
                    johanna hummel                              
    feb.,       1742.  john hagen                                  
                     abraham bueninger                           
                1744.  james burnside                              
                      rebecca burnside                            
                1745.  john brownfield                             
                      henry ferdinand beck                        
                      barbara beck                                
                      maria christina beck                        
                      jonathan beck                               
                      david beck                                  
                      anna catherina kremper                      
                1776.  andrew broesing                     to north carolina.
   may,        1779.  john george wagner                  to england.

         deaths.

   oct.  11th, 1735.  friedrich riedel                    in savannah.
   march 19th, 1736.  jacob frank                               
    march 30th,       henry roscher                             
    june  17th,       rosina haberecht                          
    oct.   3rd,       matthias boehnisch                        
    sept. 30th, 1737.  george haberland                          
    (nov.?)           anna catherina rose                       
    aug.   4th, 1739.  george schulius                     in purisburg.
   aug.  10th,       john michael schober                in savannah.
   oct.  11th, 1775.  ludwig mueller                      at knoxborough.


     summary.

       arrivals.

   from europe           43
   from pennsylvania      1
   born in georgia        2
   from north carolina    1
                         --                         47

       deaths.

   at savannah            8
   at purisburg           1
   at knoxborough         1
                         --                         10

       departures.

   to bethlehem, pa.                             18
   to other moravian congregations in america     3
   to moravian congregations in europe            8
   scattered                                      8
                                                 --
                                                 37

                                                      ------
                                                         47

   following the moravians from georgia to bethlehem     13






   index.

   (the index is retained to allow readers to browse the subjects mentioned
   in this book.  the bracketed numbers indicate how many mentions are made.
   a brief mention or 10 pages worth can both count as a single mention,
   so the numbers are sometimes deceptive.)



   act of parliament (3)
   aeltester (5)
   allen, brierly (1)
   altamaha river (7)
   anna (1)
   anthony (1)
   altona (3)
   arrivals in georgia (2)
   associates of the late dr. bray (5)
   augsburg (2)
   augusta (1)

   bader, paul peter (1)
   bands (6)
   beck, barbara (1)
   beck, david (1)
   beck, henry ferdinand (1)
   beck, jonathan (1)
   beck, maria christina (1)
   benzien, christian lewis (1)
   berthelsdorf (2)
   bethlehem (penn.) (10)
   bohemia (8)
   boehler, peter (10)  (bo"hler)
   boehner, john (8)  (bo"hner)
   boehnisch, george (2)  (bo"hnisch)
   boehnisch, matthias (2)  (bo"hnisch)
   bolzius, martin (6)
   bray, thomas (1)
   broesing, andrew (3)  (bro"sing)
   brother joseph (3)  (see also spangenberg)
   brownfield, john (2)
   bueninger, abraham (1)  (bu"ninger)
   burnside, james (1)
   burnside, rebecca (1)

   calendar (1)
   calvin, john (1)
   carolina (11)
   causton, thomas (9)
   charles ii (1)
   charles v (1)
   charlestown (9)  (modern charleston, s. c.)
   cherokees (2)
   chief elder  (see aeltester)
   christ church (1)
   church of england (9)
   collegiants (2)
   comenius, john amos (1)
   comfort (1)
   committee for relief of debtors (2)
   confession of faith, moravian (1)
   coram, thomas (2)
   cornish, capt. (3)
   creek confederacy (1)
   cunow, john gebhard (2)

   deaths (2)
   delamotte, charles (10)
   demuth, gotthard (6)
   demuth, gottlieb (3)
   demuth, regina (4)
   departures from georgia (2)
   diener (5)
   dober, john andrew (11)
   dober, leonard (1)
   dober, maria catherine (4)
   dunbar, capt. (1)
   duesseldorf (1)  (du"sseldorf)

   ebenezer, new (5)
   ebenezer, old (5)
   ebersdorf (1)
   ecce homo (1)
   ecclesiolae in ecclesia (1)
   eckstein, john (2)
   egede, hans (1)
   elders (1)
   england  (see moravian activity in england)
   english school at herrnhut (1)
   ephrata (1)
   episcopate of unitas fratrum (10)
   ermahner (1)
   ettwein, john (1)
   exile hymn (1)

   farm lots (9)
   fetter lane congregation (2)
   fetter lane society (6)
   fifty acre tracts (5)
   financial affairs (34)
   first company (5)
   five acre lots  (see garden lots)
   five hundred acre tract  (see old fort)
   five hundred acre tract (2nd) (2)
   five hundred and twenty-six acre tract (1)
   florida (1)
   foreign missions (5)
   fort argyle (1)
   forty-five acre lots  (see farm lots)
   foundry society (1)
   frank, jacob (3)
   frederica (9)
   fulneck (1)

   gale, worthington (1)
   gambold, john (1)
   garden lots (11)
   gascoine, capt. (1)
   gemeinschaft (8)
   george ii (1)
   georgia (25)
   germantown (3)
   gladman, capt. thomas (1)
   goshen (2)
   goshenhopper (1)
   greenland (1)
   gronav, israel christian (3)

   haberecht, gottfried (7)
   haberecht, rosina (2)
   haberland, george (5)
   haberland, michael (6)
   habersham, james, jr. (2)
   habersham, james, sr. (6)
   hagen, john (1)
   halle (7)
   harper, simon peter (3)
   hawk, the (4)
   helfer  (see helpers)
   helpers (2)
   herbert, henry (1)
   hermsdorf, christian adolph von (9)
   herrnhut (24)
   holland  (see moravian activity in holland)
   hourly intercession (2)
   household affairs (15)
   huber, john michael (1)
   hummel, johanna (1)
   hus, john (2)
   hutton, james (5)

   indian school house  (see irene)
   indians in georgia (27)
   indians in pennsylvania (2)
   ingham, benjamin (22)
   instructions (1)
   ireland  (see moravian activity in ireland)
   irene (4)

   jablonski (3)
   jag, david (6)
   james (1)
   jaeschke, juliana (4)  (ja"schke)
   jena (5)
   jews (1)
   johnson (1)
   journal, john wesleys (3)

   kellar, george (2)
   knox, mr. (1)
   knoxborough (1)
   koker, pieter (2)
   korte, jonas (6)
   krankenwaerter (1)  (krankenwa"rter)
   kremper, anna catherine (1)

   laborers (1)
   lambs hill (1)
   lancashire (1)
   land titles (5)
   lawson, john (2)
   leopold, archbishop of salzburg (1)
   london (7)
   london merchant, the (5)
   lords proprietors (2)
   lorenz (2)
   lot, the (12)
   lovefeasts (4)
   lower creeks (3)
   lutheran church (7)
   luther, martin (3)

   mack, john martin (4)
   marienborn (3)
   marshall, frederick william (3)
   matrimonial affairs (4)
   mcallister, matthew (1)
   melancthon (1)
   methodists (5)
   meyer, john michael (2)
   military affairs (17)
   moberley, capt. (2)
   molther, philip henry (1)
   moravia (9)
   moravian activity in england (11)
   moravian activity in holland (5)
   moravian activity in ireland (3)
   moravian congregation in fetter lane  (see fetter lane society)
   muehlenberg, henry melchior (2)  (mu"hlenberg)
   mueller, ludwig (2)  (mu"ller)
   musgrove, john (1)
   musgrove, mary (3)
   music (2)

   nazareth (4)
   negro mission (7)
   neisser, augustin (2)
   neisser, george (5)
   neisser, wenzel (3)
   neubert, rosina (1)
   new ebenezer  (see ebenezer, new)
   new inverness (1)
   nitschmann, christian david (1)
   nitschmann, david (bishop) (23)
   nitschmann, david (hausmeister, syndic) (16)
   nitschmann, immanuel (1)
   north carolina (1)
   nova scotia (1)

   ober-berthelsdorf (3)
   odingsell, charles (1)
   oeconomie (1)
   ogeechee river (6)
   oglethorpe, james (49)
   old fort (16)
   order of the mustard seed (1)
   orphan house (2)
   oxford (3)

   peeper island (cockspur) (1)
   pennsylvania (20)
   periagua (2)
   pfeil, von (4)
   pietists (1)
   pilgrim congregation (2)
   poland (3)
   port royal (1)
   potter, john (archbishop of canterbury) (2)
   province of georgia  (see georgia)
   pudsey (1)
   purisburg (6)
   putten, cornelius van (1)

   quincy, samuel (2)

   ratio disciplinae (2)
   reck, george philipp frederick von (9)
   reck, the younger (1)
   regensberg (2)
   regnier, john (10)
   religious affairs (30)
   reuss, henry xxix (1)
   revolutionary war (5)
   richter, abraham ehrenfried (3)
   riedel, catherine (3)  (see also rose, catherine)
   riedel, friedrich (8)
   robinson, john (2)
   roman catholics (6)
   roscher, henry (4)
   rose, anna catherina (1)
   rose, catherine (riedel) (5)
   rose, maria magdalena (4)
   rose, peter (15)
   rothe, john andrew (2)
   rotterdam (3)
   rotten-possum (1)

   salem (2)
   salzburgers (23)
   savannah (20)
   savannah congregation (moravian) (25)
   savannah cemetery (4)
   savannah river (5)
   savannah, the (1)
   saxony (5)
   schober, john michael (3)
   schoeneck (1)
   schulius, george (4)
   schwarz, rosina (1)
   schweinitz, hans christian alexander von (2)
   schweinitz, lewis david de (1)
   schwenkfeld, casper (1)
   schwenkfelders (10)
   second company (7)
   seifert, anton (17)
   seituah (1)
   servants of zinzendorf (12)
   seybold, matthias (4)
   shamokin (1)
   sickness (13)
   silkhope (1)
   simmonds, the (3)
   sitkovius (2)
   skidaway island (1)
   smith house (1)
   society  (see gemeinschaft)
   society for the propagation of christian knowledge (4)
   somers, benjamin (1)
   south carolina (5)
   spangenberg, august gottlieb (33)
   spangenbergs hymn (1)
   spaniards (7)
   spanish war (4)
   spener, philip jacob (2)
   sterlings bluff (1)
   st. simons island (4)
   st. thomas (6)
   swiss emigrants (5)

   tanneberger, david (6)
   tanneberger, john (2)
   thomas, capt. (1)
   thomson, capt. (5)
   thunderbolt (1)
   toeltschig, john (39)  (to"ltschig)
   toeltschig, judith (8)  (to"ltschig)
   tomochichi (15)
   town lots (10)
   trades (11)
   triebner (1)
   trustees for establishing the colony of georgia in america (27)
   tuebingen (1)  (tu"bingen)
   two brothers, the (2)
   two hundred acre tract (3)
   tybee (5)

   union galley, the (1)
   unitas fratrum (18)
   upper creeks (1)
   urlsperger, samuel (4)

   vat, mr. (1)
   verelst, secy (2)
   vernon, james (3)
   vollmar (3)
   vorsteher (1)
   voyages (9)

   wachovia tract (2)
   wagner, john george (4)
   waschke, anna (4)
   waschke, george (6)
   waschke, juliana jaeschke (3)  (ja"schke)) (see also jaeschke, juliana)
   weintraube, mrs. (2)
   wesley, charles (13)
   wesley, john (30)
   wesley, samuel (1)
   west indies (7)
   whitefield, george (9)
   wiegner, christopher (george) (2)
   wittenberg (2)
   woodruff, george (1)
   wright, sir james (1)
   wynantz (2)

   yorkshire (3)
   ysselstein (2)

   zeisberger, david, jr. (5)
   zeisberger, david, sr. (3)
   zeisberger, rosina (3)
   ziegenhagen (2)
   zinzendorf, christian ludwig von (1)
   zinzendorf, erdmuth dorothea von (3)
   zinzendorf, nicholas lewis von (count) (29)






end of project gutenbergs the moravians in georgia, by adelaide l. fries

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the moravians in georgia ***

***** this file should be named 570-0.txt or 570-0.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/570/

produced by a. light

updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project
gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b.  project gutenberg is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (the foundation
 or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.

1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.

1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase project
gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase project gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original plain vanilla ascii or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4, information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
     license.  you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg-tm works.

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you as-is with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.


section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tms
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundations ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your states laws.

the foundations principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundations web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

for additional contact information:
     dr. gregory b. newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
