the project gutenberg ebook of paul the peddler, by horatio alger, jr.

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: paul the peddler
       the fortunes of a young street merchant

author: horatio alger, jr.

release date: march 18, 2006 [ebook #659]
last updated: march 3, 2018

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook paul the peddler ***




produced by charles keller and david widger





paul the peddler,

or the fortunes of a young street merchant


by horatio alger, jr.




biography and bibliography

horatio alger, jr., an author who lived among and for boys and himself
remained a boy in heart and association till death, was born at revere,
mass., january 13, 1834. he was the son of a clergyman, was graduated
at harvard college in 1852, and at its divinity school in 1860 and was
pastor of the unitarian church at brewster, mass., in 1862-66.

in the latter year he settled in new york and began drawing public
attention to the condition and needs of street boys. he mingled with
them, gained their confidence showed a personal concern in their
affairs, and stimulated them to honest and useful living. with his first
story he won the hearts of all red-blooded boys everywhere, and of the
seventy or more that followed over a million copies were sold during the
author's lifetime.

in his later life he was in appearance a short, stout, bald-headed man,
with cordial manners and whimsical views of things that amused all who
met him. he died at natick, mass., july 18, 1899.

mr. alger's stories are as popular now as when first published, because
they treat of real live boys who were always up and about--just like
the boys found everywhere to-day. they are pure in tone and inspiring
in influence, and many reforms in the juvenile life of new york may be
traced to them. among the best known are:

strong and steady; strive and succeed; try and trust; bound to rise;
risen from the ranks; herbert carter's legacy; brave and bold; jack's
ward; shifting for himself; wait and hope; paul the peddler; phil
the fiddler; slow and sure; julius the street boy; tom the bootblack;
struggling upward, facing the world; the cash boy; making his way; tony
the tramp; joe's luck; do and dare; only an irish boy; sink or swim;
a cousin's conspiracy; andy gordon; bob burton; harry vane; hector's
inheritance; mark mason's triumph; sam's chance; the telegraph boy; the
young adventurer; the young outlaw; the young salesman, and luke walton.





paul the peddler



chapter i

paul the peddler

here's your prize packages! only five cents! money prize in every
package! walk up, gentlemen, and try your luck!

the speaker, a boy of fourteen, stood in front of the shabby brick
building, on nassau street, which has served for many years as the new
york post office. in front of him, as he stood with his back to the
building, was a small basket, filled with ordinary letter envelopes,
each labeled prize package.

his attractive announcement, which, at that time, had also the merit of
novelty--for paul had himself hit upon the idea, and manufactured the
packages, as we shall hereafter explain--drew around him a miscellaneous
crowd, composed chiefly of boys.

what's in the packages, johnny? asked a bootblack, with his box
strapped to his back.

candy, answered paul. buy one. only five cents.

there ain't much candy, answered the bootblack, with a disparaging
glance.

what if there isn't? there's a prize.

how big a prize?

there's a ten-cent stamp in some of 'em. all have got something in
'em.

influenced by this representation, the bootblack drew out a five-cent
piece, and said:

pitch one over then. i guess i can stand it. an envelope was at once
handed him.

open it, johnny, said a newsboy at his side. twenty curious eyes were
fixed upon him as he opened the package. he drew out rather a scanty
supply of candy, and then turning to paul, with a look of indignation,
said:

where's the prize? i don't see no prize. give me back my five cents.

give it to me. i'll show you, said the young merchant.

he thrust in his finger, and drew out a square bit of paper, on which
was written--one cent.

there's your prize, he added, drawing a penny from his pocket.

it ain't much of a prize, said the buyer. where's your ten cents?

i didn't say i put ten cents into every package, answered paul.

i'd burst up pretty quick if i did that. who'll have another package?
only five cents!

curiosity and taste for speculation are as prevalent among children as
with men, so this appeal produced its effect.

give me a package, said teddy o'brien, a newsboy, stretching out a
dirty hand, containing the stipulated sum. he also was watched curiously
as he opened the package. he drew out a paper bearing the words--two
cents.

bully for you, teddy! you've had better luck than i, said the
bootblack.

the check was duly honored, and teddy seemed satisfied, though
the amount of candy he received probably could not have cost over
half-a-cent. still, he had drawn twice as large a prize as the first
buyer, and that was satisfactory.

who'll take the next? asked paul, in a businesslike manner. maybe
there's ten cents in this package. that's where you double your money.
walk up, gentlemen. only five cents!

three more responded to this invitation, one drawing a prize of two
cents, the other two of one cent each. just then, as it seemed doubtful
whether any more would be purchased by those present, a young man,
employed in a wall street house, came out of the post office.

what have you got here? he asked, pausing.

prize packages of candy! money prize in every package! only five
cents!

give me one, then. i never drew a prize in my life.

the exchange was speedily made.

i don't see any prize, he said, opening it.

it's on a bit of paper, mister, said teddy, nearly as much interested
as if it had been his own purchase.

oh, yes, i see. well, i'm in luck. ten cents!

ten cents! exclaimed several of the less fortunate buyers, with a
shade of envy.

here's your prize, mister, said paul, drawing out a ten-cent stamp
from his vest pocket.

well, johnny, you do things on the square, that's a fact. just keep the
ten cents, and give me two more packages.

this paul did with alacrity; but the wall street clerk's luck was at an
end. he got two prizes of a penny each.

well, he said, i'm not much out of pocket. i've bought three
packages, and it's only cost me three cents.

the ten-cent prize produced a favorable effect on the business of the
young peddler. five more packages were bought, and the contents eagerly
inspected; but no other large prize appeared. two cents was the maximum
prize drawn. their curiosity being satisfied, the crowd dispersed;
but it was not long before another gathered. in fact, paul had shown
excellent judgment in selecting the front of the post office as his
place of business. hundreds passed in and out every hour, besides those
who passed by on a different destination. thus many ears caught the
young peddler's cry--prize packages! only five cents apiece!--and
made a purchase; most from curiosity, but some few attracted by the
businesslike bearing of the young merchant, and willing to encourage
him in his efforts to make a living. these last, as well as some of the
former class, declined to accept the prizes, so that these were so much
gain to paul.

at length but one package remained, and this paul was some time getting
rid of. at last a gentleman came up, holding a little boy of seven by
the hand.

oh, buy me the package, papa? he said, drawing his father's attention.

what is there in it, boy? asked the gentleman.

candy, was the answer.

alfred, for this was the little boy's name, renewed his entreaties,
having, like most boys, a taste for candy.

there it is, alfred, said his father, handing the package to his
little son.

there's a prize inside, said paul, seeing that they were about to
pass.

we must look for the prize by all means, said the gentleman. what is
this? one cent?

yes sir; and paul held out a cent to his customer.

never mind about that! you may keep the prize.

i want it, pa, interposed alfred, with his mouth full of candy.

i'll give you another, said his father, still declining to accept the
proffered prize.

paul now found himself in the enviable position of one who, at eleven
o'clock, had succeeded in disposing of his entire stock in trade, and
that at an excellent profit, as we soon shall see. business had been
more brisk with him than with many merchants on a larger scale, who
sometimes keep open their shops all day without taking in enough to pay
expenses. but, then, it is to be considered that in paul's case expenses
were not a formidable item. he had no rent to pay, for one thing,
nor clerk hire, being competent to attend to his entire business
single-handed. all his expense, in fact, was the first cost of his stock
in trade, and he had so fixed his prices as to insure a good profit on
that. so, on the whole, paul felt very well satisfied at the result
of his experiment, for this was his first day in the prize-package
business.

i guess i'll go home, he said to himself. mother'll want to know how
i made out. he turned up nassau street, and had reached the corner of
maiden lane, when teddy o'brien met him.

did you sell out, johnny? he asked.

yes, answered paul.

how many packages did you have?

fifty.

that's bully. how much you made?

i can't tell yet. i haven't counted up, said paul.

it's better'n sellin' papers, i'll bet. i've only made thirty cents the
day. don't you want to take a partner, johnny?

no, i don't think i do, said paul, who had good reason to doubt
whether such a step would be to his advantage.

then i'll go in for myself, said teddy, somewhat displeased at the
refusal.

go ahead! there's nobody to stop you, said paul.

i'd rather go in with you, said teddy, feeling that there would be
some trouble in making the prize packages, but influenced still more by
the knowledge that he had not capital enough to start in the business
alone.

no, said paul, positively; i don't want any partner. i can do well
enough alone.

he was not surprised at teddy's application. street boys are as
enterprising, and have as sharp eyes for business as their elders, and
no one among them can monopolize a profitable business long. this is
especially the case with the young street merchant. when one has had
the good luck to find some attractive article which promises to sell
briskly, he takes every care to hide the source of his supply from his
rivals in trade. but this is almost impossible. cases are frequent where
such boys are subjected to the closest espionage, their steps being
dogged for hours by boys who think they have found a good thing and are
determined to share it. in the present case paul had hit upon an idea
which seemed to promise well, and he was determined to keep it to
himself as long as possible. as soon as he was subjected to competition
and rivalry his gains would probably diminish.



chapter ii

paul at home

paul went up centre street and turned into pearl. stopping before a
tenement-house, he entered, and, going up two flights of stairs, opened
a door and entered.

you are home early, paul, said a woman of middle age, looking up at
his entrance.

yes, mother; i've sold out.

you've not sold out the whole fifty packages? she asked, in surprise.

yes, i have. i had capital luck.

why, you must have made as much as a dollar, and it's not twelve yet.

i've made more than that, mother. just wait a minute, till i've
reckoned up a little. where's jimmy?

miss beckwith offered to take him out to walk with her, so i let him
go. he'll be back at twelve.

while paul is making a calculation, a few words of explanation and
description may be given, so that the reader may understand better how
he is situated.

the rooms occupied by paul and his mother were three in number. the
largest one was about fourteen feet square, and was lighted by two
windows. it was covered with a neat, though well-worn, carpet; a few
cane-bottomed chairs were ranged at the windows, and on each side of the
table. there was a french clock on the mantel, a rocking chair for his
mother, and a few inexpensive engravings hung upon the walls. there was
a hanging bookcase containing two shelves, filled with books, partly
school books, supplemented by a few miscellaneous books, such as
robinson crusoe, pilgrim's progress, a volume of poetical
selections, an odd volume of scott, and several others. out of the main
room opened two narrow chambers, both together of about the same area as
the main room. one of these was occupied by paul and jimmy, the other by
his mother.

those who are familiar with the construction of a new york
tenement-house will readily understand the appearance of the rooms into
which we have introduced them. it must, however, be explained that few
similar apartments are found so well furnished. carpets are not very
common in tenement-houses, and if there are any pictures, they are
usually the cheapest prints. wooden chairs, and generally every object
of the cheapest, are to be met with in the dwellings of the new york
poor. if we find something better in the present instance, it is not
because paul and his mother are any better off than their neighbors. on
the contrary, there are few whose income is so small. but they have seen
better days, and the furniture we see has been saved from the time of
their comparative prosperity.

as paul is still at his estimate, let us improve the opportunity by
giving a little of their early history.

mr. hoffman, the father of paul, was born in germany, but came to new
york when a boy of twelve, and there he grew up and married, his wife
being an american. he was a cabinetmaker, and, being a skillful workman,
earned very good wages, so that he was able to maintain his family in
comfort. they occupied a neat little cottage in harlem, and lived very
happily, for mr. hoffman was temperate and kind, when an unfortunate
accident clouded their happiness, and brought an end to their
prosperity. in crossing broadway at its most crowded part, the husband
and father was run over by a loaded dray, and so seriously injured that
he lived but a few hours. then the precarious nature of their prosperity
was found out. mr. hoffman had not saved anything, having always lived
up to the extent of his income. it was obviously impossible for them to
continue to live in their old home, paying a rent of twenty dollars per
month. besides, paul did not see any good opportunity to earn his living
in harlem. so, at his instigation, his mother moved downtown, and took
rooms in a tenement-house in pearl street, agreeing to pay six dollars
a month for apartments which would now command double the price. they
brought with them furniture enough to furnish the three rooms, selling
the rest for what it would bring, and thus obtaining a small reserve
fund, which by this time was nearly exhausted.

once fairly established in their new home, paul went out into the
streets to earn his living. the two most obvious, and, on the whole,
most profitable trades, were blacking boots and selling newspapers. to
the first paul, who was a neat boy, objected on the score that it would
keep his hands and clothing dirty, and, street boy though he had become,
he had a pride in his personal appearance. to selling papers he had not
the same objection, but he had a natural taste for trade, and this led
him to join the ranks of the street peddlers. he began with vending
matches, but found so much competition in the business, and received
so rough a reception oftentimes from those who had repeated calls from
others in the same business, that he gave it up, and tried something
else. but the same competition which crowds the professions and the
higher employments followed by men, prevails among the street trades
which are pursued by boys. if paul had only had himself to support,
he could have made a fair living at match selling, or any other of the
employments he took up; but his mother could not earn much at making
vests, and jimmy was lame, and could do nothing to fill the common
purse, so that paul felt that his earnings must be the main support of
the family, and naturally sought out what would bring him in most money.

at length he had hit upon selling prize packages, and his first
experience in that line are recorded in the previous chapter. adding
only that it was now a year since his father's death, we resume our
narrative.

do you want to know how much i've made, mother? asked paul, looking up
at length from his calculation.

yes, paul.

a dollar and thirty cents.

i did not think it would amount to so much. the prizes came to
considerable, didn't they?

listen, and i will tell you how i stand:

     one pound of candy  . . . . . . . .   .20
     two packs of envelopes . . . . . . .  .10
     prize. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .90

     ----
     that makes . . . . . . . . . . . .  $1.20

i sold the fifty packages at five cents each, and that brought me in two
dollars and a half. taking out the expenses, it leaves me a dollar and
thirty cents. isn't that doing well for one morning's work?

it's excellent; but i thought your prizes amounted to more than ninety
cents.

so they did, but several persons who bought wouldn't take their prizes,
and that was so much gain.

you have done very well, paul. i wish you might earn as much every
day.

i'm going to earn some more this afternoon. i bought a pound of candy
on the way home, and some cheap envelopes, and i'll be making up a new
stock while i am waiting for dinner.

paul took out his candy and envelopes, and set about making up the
packages.

did any complain of the small amount of candy you put in?

a few; but most bought for the sake of the prizes.

perhaps you had better be a little more liberal with your candy, and
then there may not be so much dissatisfaction where the prize is only a
penny.

i don't know but your are right, mother. i believe i'll only make
thirty packages with this pound, instead of fifty. thirty'll be all i
can sell this afternoon.

just then the door opened, and paul's brother entered.

jimmy hoffman, or lame jimmy, as he was often called, was a
delicate-looking boy of ten, with a fair complexion and sweet face, but
incurably lame, a defect which, added to his delicate constitution,
was likely to interfere seriously with his success in life. but, as
frequently happens, jimmy was all the more endeared to his mother
and brother by his misfortune and bodily weakness, and if either were
obliged to suffer from poverty, jimmy would be spared the suffering.

well, jimmy, have you had a pleasant walk? asked his mother.

yes, mother; i went down to fulton market. there's a good deal to see
there.

a good deal more than in this dull room, jimmy.

it doesn't seem dull to me, mother, while you are here. how did you
make out selling your prize packages?

they are all sold, jimmy, every one. i am making some more.

shan't i help you?

yes, i would like to have you. just take those envelopes, and write
prize packages on every one of them.

all right, paul, and jimmy, glad to be of use, got the pen and ink,
and, gathering up the envelopes, began to inscribe them as he had been
instructed.

by the time the packages were made up, dinner was ready. it was not a
very luxurious repast. there was a small piece of rump steak--not more
than three-quarters of a pound--a few potatoes, a loaf of bread, and a
small plate of butter. that was all; but then the cloth that covered
the table was neat and clean, and the knives and forks were as bright as
new, and what there was tasted good.

what have you been doing this morning, jimmy? asked paul.

i have been drawing, paul. here's a picture of friday. i copied it from
'robinson crusoe.'

he showed the picture, which was wonderfully like that in the book, for
this--the gift of drawing--was jimmy's one talent, and he possessed it
in no common degree.

excellent, jimmy! said paul. you're a real genius. i shouldn't be
surprised if you'd make an artist some day.

i wish i might, said jimmy, earnestly. there's nothing i'd like
better.

i'll tell you what, jimmy. if i do well this afternoon, i'll buy you a
drawing-book and some paper, to work on while mother and i are busy.

if you can afford it, paul, i should like it so much. some time i might
earn something that way.

of course you may, said paul, cheerfully. i won't forget you.

dinner over, paul went out to business, and was again successful,
getting rid of his thirty packages, and clearing another dollar. half of
this he invested in a drawing-book, a pencil and some drawing-paper for
jimmy. even then he had left of his earnings for the day one dollar and
eighty cents. but this success in the new business had already excited
envy and competition, as he was destined to find out on the morrow.



chapter iii

paul has competitors

the next morning paul took his old place in front of the post office.
he set down his basket in front, and, taking one of the packages in his
hand, called out in a businesslike manner, as on the day before, here's
your prize packages! only five cents! money prize in every package! walk
up, gentlemen, and try your luck!

he met with a fair degree of success at first, managing in the course of
an hour to sell ten packages. all the prizes drawn were small, with the
exception of one ten-cent prize, which was drawn by a little bootblack,
who exclaimed:

that's the way to do business, johnny. if you've got any more of them
ten-cent prizes, i'll give you ten cents a piece for the lot.

better buy some more and see, said paul.

that don't go down, said the other. maybe there'd be only a penny.

nevertheless, the effect of this large prize was to influence the sale
of three other packages; but as neither of these contained more than
two-cent prizes, trade began to grow dull, and for ten minutes all
paul's eloquent appeals to gentlemen to walk up and try their luck
produced no effect.

at this point paul found that there was a rival in the field.

teddy o'brien, who had applied for a partnership the day before, came
up with a basket similar to his own, apparently filled with similar
packages. he took a position about six feet distant from paul, and began
to cry out, in a shrill voice:

here's your bully prize packages! best in the market! here's where you
get your big prizes, fifty cents in some of 'em. walk up boys, tumble
up, and take your pick afore they're gone. fifty cents for five!

that's a lie, teddy, said paul, who saw that his rival's attractive
announcement was likely to spoil his trade.

no, 'tisn't, said teddy. if you don't believe it, just buy one and
see.

i'll tell you what i'll do, said paul, i'll exchange.

no, said teddy; i ain't a-goin' to risk givin' fifty cents for one.

more likely you'd get ten for one. you're a humbug.

have you really got any fifty-cent prizes? asked a newsboy, who had
sold out his morning stock of papers, and was lounging about the post
office steps.

best way is to buy, johnny, said teddy.

the boy did buy, but his prize amounted to only one cent.

didn't i tell you so? said paul.

just wait a while and see, said teddy. the lucky feller hasn't come
along. here, mike, jest buy a package!

mike, a boy of fifteen, produced five cents, and said, i don't mind if
i do.

he selected a package, and, without opening it, slipped it into his
pocket.

why don't you open it? said teddy.

what's the use? said mike. there ain't no fifty cents inside.

however, he drew it out of his pocket, and opened it.

what's this? he exclaimed, pulling out a piece of scrip. howly st.
patrick! it's i that's in luck, anyhow i've got the fifty cents!

and he held up to view a fifty-cent scrip.

let me look at it, said paul, incredulously.

but there was no room for doubt. it was a genuine fifty cents, as paul
was compelled to admit.

didn't i tell you so? said teddy, triumphantly. here's where you get
fifty-cent prizes.

the appeal was successful. the sight of the fifty-cent prize led to a
large call for packages, of which teddy immediately sold ten, while paul
found himself completely deserted. none of the ten, however, contained
over two cents. still the possibility of drawing fifty cents kept up the
courage of buyers, while paul's inducements were so far inferior that he
found himself wholly distanced.

don't you wish you'd gone pardners with me? asked teddy, with a
triumphant grin, noticing paul's look of discomfiture. you can't do
business alongside of me.

you can't make any money giving such big prizes, said paul. you
haven't taken in as much as you've given yet.

all right, said teddy. i'm satisfied if you are. have a package,
jim?

yes, said jim. mind you give me a good prize.

the package was bought, and, on being opened, proved to contain fifty
cents also, to paul's great amazement. how teddy's business could pay,
as it was managed, he could not comprehend. one thing was certain,
however, his new competitor monopolized the trade, and for two hours
paul did not get a solitary customer.

there's something about this i don't understand, he pondered,
thoughtfully. he must lose money; but he's spoiled my trade.

paul did not like to give up his beat, but he found himself compelled
to. accordingly he took his basket, and moved off toward wall street.
here he was able to start in business without competitors, and succeeded
in selling quite a number of packages, until a boy came up, and said:

there's a feller up at the post office that's givin' fifty-cent prizes.
i got one of 'em.

there was a group of half-a-dozen boys around paul, two of whom were
about to invest; but on hearing thus they changed their intention, and
walked of in the direction of the post office.

looking up, paul saw that the boy who had injured his trade was mike,
who had drawn the first fifty-cent prize from his competitor.

can't you stop interfering? he said, angrily. i've lost two customers
by you.

if you don't like it, you can lump it, said mike, insolently. this is
a free country, ain't it?

it's a mean trick, said paul, indignantly.

say that ag'in, and i'll upset your basket, returned mike.

i'll say it as often as i like, said paul, who wasn't troubled by
cowardice. come on, if you want to.

mike advanced a step, doubling his fists; but, finding that paul showed
no particular sign of fear, he stopped short, saying: i'll lick you
some other time.

you'd better put it off, said paul. have a prize package, sir? only
five cents!

this was addressed to a young man who came out of an insurance office.

i don't mind if i do, said the young man. five cents, is it? what
prize may i expect?

the highest is ten cents.

there's a boy around the post office that gives fifty-cent prizes,
mister, said mike. you'd better buy of him.

i'll wait till another time, said the young man. here's the money,
johnny. now for the package.

look here, said paul, indignantly, when his customer had gone away;
haven't you anything to do except to drive off my customers?

give me two cents on every package, said mike, and i'll tell 'em you
give dollar prizes.

that would be a lie, and i don't want to do business that way.

mike continued his persecutions a while longer, and then turned the
corner into nassau street.

i'm glad he's gone, thought paul. now there's a chance for me.

he managed after a while to sell twenty of his packages. by this time it
was twelve o'clock, and he began to feel hungry. he resolved, therefore,
to go home to dinner and come out again in the afternoon. he didn't know
how much he had made, but probably about fifty cents. he had made more
than double as much the day before in less time; but then he did not
suffer from competition.

he began to doubt whether he could long pursue this business, since
other competitors were likely to spring up.

as he walked by the post office he had the curiosity to look and see how
his competitor was getting along.

teddy had started, originally, with seventy-five packages; but of those
scarcely a dozen were left. a group of boys were around him. among
them was mike, who was just on the point of buying another package. as
before, he put it in his pocket, and it was not till teddy asked, what
luck, mike? that he drew it out, and opening it again, produced fifty
cents.

it's the big prize! he said. sure i'm in luck, anyhow.

you're the boy that's lucky, said teddy, with a grin.

as paul witnessed the scene a light broke upon him. now he understood
how teddy could afford to give such large prizes. mike and the other
boy, jim, were only confederates of his--decoy ducks--who kept drawing
over again the same prize, which was eventually given back to teddy. it
was plain now why mike put the package into his pocket before opening
it. it was to exchange it for another packet into which the money had
previously been placed, but which was supposed by the lookers-on to
be the same that had just been purchased. the prize could afterward be
placed in a new packet and used over again.

that ain't the same package, said paul, announcing his discovery. he
had it all the while in his pocket.

look here, blustered mike, you jest mind your own business! that's
the best thing for you.

suppose i don't?

if you don't there may be a funeral to-morrow of a boy about your
size.

there was a laugh at paul's expense, but he took it coolly.

i'll send you a particular invitation to attend, if i can get anybody
to go over to the island.

as mike had been a resident at blackwell's island on two different
occasions, this produced a laugh at his expense, in the midst of which
paul walked off.



chapter iv

teddy gives up business

have you sold all your packages, paul? asked jimmy, as our hero
entered the humble room, where the table was already spread with a
simple dinner.

no, said paul, i only sold twenty. i begin to think that the
prize-package business will soon be played out.

why?

there's too many that'll go into it.

here paul related his experience of the morning, explaining how it was
that teddy had managed to distance him in the competition.

can't you do the same, paul? asked jimmy. mother's got a gold dollar
she could lend you.

that might do, said paul; but i don't know any boy i could trust to
draw it except you, and some of them would know we were brothers.

i think, paul, that would be dishonest, said mrs. hoffman. i would
rather make less, if i were you, and do it honestly.

maybe you're right, mother. i'll try it again this afternoon, keeping
as far away from teddy as i can. if i find i can't make it go, i'll try
some other business.

jimmy, have you shown paul your drawing? said his mother.

here it is, paul, said jimmy, producing his drawing-book, from which
he had copied a simple design of a rustic cottage.

why, that's capital, jimmy, said paul, in real surprise. i had no
idea you would succeed so well.

do you really think so, paul? asked the little boy, much pleased.

i really do. how long did it take you?

only a short time--not more than half an hour, i should think, said
mrs. hoffman. i think jimmy succeeded very well.

you'll make a great artist some time, jimmy, said paul.

i wish i could, said the little boy. i should like to earn some
money, so that you and mother need not work so hard.

hard work agrees with me. i'm tough, said paul. but when we get to
be men, jimmy, we'll make so much money that mother needn't work at all.
she shall sit in the parlor all day, dressed in silk, with nothing to
do.

i don't think i would enjoy that, said mrs. hoffman, smiling.

will you be in the candy business, then, paul? said jimmy.

no, jimmy. it would never do for the brother of a great artist to be
selling candy round the streets. i hope i shall have something better to
do than that.

sit down to dinner, paul, said his mother. it's all ready.

the dinner was not a luxurious one. there was a small plate of cold
meat, some potatoes, and bread and butter; but mrs. hoffman felt glad to
be able to provide even that, and paul, who had the hearty appetite of
a growing boy, did full justice to the fare. they had scarcely finished,
when a knock was heard at the door. paul, answering the summons,
admitted a stout, pleasant-looking irishwoman.

the top of the mornin' to ye, mrs. donovan, said paul, bowing
ceremoniously.

ah, ye'll be afther havin' your joke, paul, said mrs. donovan,
good-naturedly. and how is your health, mum, the day?

i am well, thank you, mrs. donovan, said mrs. hoffman. sit down to
the table, won't you? we're just through dinner, but there's something
left.

thank you, mum, i've jist taken dinner. i was goin' to wash this
afternoon, and i thought maybe you'd have some little pieces i could
wash jist as well as not.

thank you, mrs. donovan, you are very kind; but you must have enough
work of your own to do.

i'm stout and strong, mum, and hard work agrees with me; but you're a
rale lady, and ain't used to it. it's only a thrifle, but if you want to
pay me, you could do a bit of sewin' for me. i ain't very good with the
needle. my fingers is too coarse, belike.

thank you, mrs. donovan; on those terms i will agree to your kind
offer. washing is a little hard for me.

mrs. hoffman collected a few pieces, and, wrapping them up in a
handkerchief, handed them to her guest.

and now what have you been doin', jimmy darlint? said mrs. donovan,
turning her broad, good-humored face toward the younger boy.

i've been drawing a picture, said jimmy. would you like to see it?

now, isn't that illigant? exclaimed mrs. donovan, admiringly, taking
the picture and gazing at it with rapt admiration. who showed you how
to do it?

paul bought me a book, and i copied it out of that.

you're a rale genius. maybe you'll make pictures some time like them we
have in the church, of the blessed virgin and the saints. do you think
you could draw me, now? she asked, with curiosity.

i haven't got a piece of paper big enough, said jimmy, slyly.

ah, it's pokin' fun at me, ye are, said mrs. donovan, good-humoredly.
just like my pat; he run into the room yesterday sayin', 'mother,
there's great news. barnum's fat woman is dead, and he's comin' afther
you this afternoon. he'll pay you ten dollars a week and board.' 'whist,
ye spalpeen!' said i; 'is it makin' fun of your poor mother, ye are?'
but i couldn't help laughing at the impertinence of the boy. but i must
be goin'.

thank you for your kind offer, mrs. donovan. jimmy shall go to your
room for the sewing.

there's no hurry about that, said mrs. donovan. i'll jist bring it in
meself when it's ready.

she is very kind, said mrs. hoffman, when bridget donovan had gone. i
shall be glad to have her wash. i am apt to feel weak after it. what are
you going to do this afternoon, paul?

i'll try to sell out the rest of my stock of packages. perhaps i shan't
succeed, but i'll do my best. shall you have another picture to show me
when i come back tonight, jimmy?

yes, paul; i love to draw. i'm going to try this castle.

it's rather hard, isn't it?

i can do it, said jimmy, confidently.

paul left the room with his basket on his arm.

he was drawn by curiosity to the spot where he had met with his first
success, as well as his first failure--the front of the post office.
here he became witness to an unexpectedly lively scene; in other words,
a fight, in which teddy o'brien and his confederate, mike, were the
contestants. to explain the cause of the quarrel, it must be stated that
it related to a division of the spoils.

teddy had sold out his last package, seventy-five in number. for these
he had received five cents apiece, making in all three dollars and
seventy-five cents, of which all but a dollar and seventy-five cents,
representing the value of the prizes and the original cost of the
packages and their contents, was profit. now, according to the
arrangement entered into between him and mike, the latter, for his
services, was to receive one cent on every package sold. this, however,
seemed to teddy too much to pay, so, when the time of reckoning came, he
stoutly asseverated that there were but sixty packages.

that don't go down, said mike, indignantly; it's nearer a hundred.

no, it isn't. it's only sixty. you've got the fifty cents, and i'll
give you ten more.

you must give me the whole sixty, then, said mike, changing his
ground. i drawed the fifty as a prize.

teddy was struck with astonishment at the impudence of this assumption.

it wasn't no prize, he said.

yes, it was, said mike. you said so yourself. didn't he, jim?

jim, who was also a confederate, but had agreed to accept twenty-five
cents in full for services rendered, promptly answered:

shure, mike's right. it was a prize he drew.

you want to chate me! said teddy, angrily.

what have you been doin' all the mornin'? demanded mike. you're the
chap to talk about chatin', ain't you?

i'll give you twenty-five cents, said teddy, and that's all i will
give you.

then you've got to fight, said mike, squaring off.

yes, you've got to fight! chimed in jim, who thought he saw a chance
for more money.

teddy looked at his two enemies, each of whom was probably more than a
match for himself, and was not long in deciding that his best course was
to avoid a fight by running. accordingly, he tucked all the money
into his pocket, and, turning incontinently, fled down liberty street,
closely pursued by his late confederates. paul came up just in time to
hear the termination of the dispute and watch the flight of his late
business rival.

i guess teddy won't go into the business again, he reflected. i may
as well take my old stand.

accordingly he once more installed himself on the post office steps, and
began to cry, prize packages. only five cents!

having no competitor now to interfere with his trade, he met with fair
success, and by four o'clock was able to start for home with his empty
basket, having disposed of all his stock in trade.

his profits, though not so great as the day before, amounted to a
dollar.

if i could only make a dollar every day, thought paul, i would be
satisfied.



chapter v

paul loses his basket

paul continued in the prize-package business for three weeks. his
success varied, but he never made less than seventy-five cents a day,
and sometimes as much as a dollar and a quarter. he was not without
competitors. more than once, on reaching his accustomed stand, he found
a rival occupying it before him. in such cases he quietly passed on,
and set up his business elsewhere, preferring to monopolize the trade,
though the location might not be so good.

teddy o'brien did not again enter the field. we left him, at the end
of the last chapter, trying to escape from mike and jim, who demanded a
larger sum than he was willing to pay for their services. he succeeded
in escaping with his money, but the next day the two confederates caught
him, and teddy received a black eye as a receipt in full of all demands.
so, on the whole, he decided that some other business would suit
him better, and resumed the blacking-box, which he had abandoned on
embarking in commercial pursuits.

mike donovan and jim parker were two notoriously bad boys, preferring to
make a living in any other way than by honest industry. as some of these
ways were not regarded as honest in the sight of the law, each had more
than once been sentenced to a term at blackwell's island. they made a
proposition to paul to act as decoy ducks for him in the same way as for
teddy. he liked neither of the boys, and did not care to be associated
with them. this refusal mike and jim resented, and determined to pay
off paul if they ever got a chance. our hero from time to time saw them
hovering about him, but took very little notice of them.

he knew that he was a match for either, though mike exceeded him in
size, and he felt quite capable of taking care of himself.

one day mike and jim, whose kindred tastes led them to keep company,
met at the corner of liberty and william streets. mike looked unusually
dilapidated. he had had a scuffle the day before with another boy, and
his clothes, always well ventilated, got torn in several extra places.
as it was very uncertain when he would be in a financial condition to
provide himself with another suit, the prospect was rather alarming. jim
parker looked a shade more respectable in attire, but his face and
hands were streaked with blacking. to this, however, jim had become so
accustomed that he would probably have felt uncomfortable with a clean
face.

how are you off for stamps, jim? asked mike.

dead broke, was the reply.

so am i. i ain't had no breakfast.

nor i 'cept an apple. couldn't i eat, though?

suppose we borrow a quarter of paul hoffman.

he wouldn't lend a feller.

not if he knowed it, said mike, significantly.

what do you mean, mike? asked jim, with some curiosity.

we'll borrow without leave.

how'll we do it?

i'll tell you, said mike.

he proceeded to unfold his plan, which was briefly this. the two were
to saunter up to where paul was standing; and remain until the group, if
there were any around him should be dispersed. then one was to pull his
hat over his eyes, while the other would snatch the basket containing
his prize packages, and run down liberty street, never stopping until he
landed in a certain alley known to both boys. the other would run in a
different direction, and both would meet as soon as practicable for the
division of the spoils. it was yet so early that paul could not have
sold many from his stock. as each contained a prize, varying from
one penny to ten, they would probably realize enough to buy a good
breakfast, besides the candy contained in the packages. more money might
be obtained by selling packages, but there was risk in this. besides, it
would take time, and they decided that a bird in the hand was worth two
in the bush.

that's a good idea, said jim, approvingly. who'll knock his hat over
his head?

you can, said mike, and i'll grab the basket. but to this jim
demurred, for two reasons: first, he was rather afraid of paul, whose
strength of arm he had tested on a previous occasion; and, again, he
was afraid that if mike got off with the basket he would appropriate the
lion's share.

i'll grab the basket, he said.

what for? said mike, suspiciously, for he, too, felt some distrust of
his confederate.

you're stronger'n i am, mike, said jim. maybe he'd turn on me, and i
can't fight him as well as you.

that's so, said mike, who had rather a high idea of his own prowess,
and felt pleased with the compliment. i'm a match for him.

of course you be, said jim, artfully, and he knows it.

of course he does, said mike, boastfully. i can lick him with one
hand.

jim had serious doubts of this, but he had his reasons for concurring in
mike's estimate of his own powers.

we'd better start now, said jim. i'm awful hungry.

come along, then.

they walked up liberty street, as far as nassau. on reaching the corner
they saw their unconscious victim at his usual place. it was rather a
public place for an assault, and both boys would have hesitated had they
not been incited by a double motive--the desire of gain and a feeling of
hostility.

they sauntered along, and mike pressed in close by paul.

what do you want? asked paul, not liking the vicinity.

what's that to you? demanded mike.

quit crowdin' me.

i ain't crowdin'. i've got as much right to be here as you.

here's your prize packages! exclaimed paul, in a businesslike tone.

maybe i'll buy one if you'll give me credit till to-morrow, said mike.

your credit isn't good with me, said paul. you must pay cash down.

then you won't trust me? said mike, pressing a little closer.

no, i won't, said paul, decidedly.

then, take that, you spalpeen! said mike, suddenly pulling paul's hat
over his eyes.

at the same time jim, to whom he had tipped a wink, snatched the basket,
which paul held loosely in his hand, and disappeared round the corner.

the attack was so sudden and unexpected that paul was at first
bewildered. but he quickly recovered his presence of mind, and saw into
the trick. he raised his hat, and darted in pursuit of mike, not knowing
in what direction his basket had gone.

that's a mean trick! he exclaimed, indignantly. give me back my
basket, you thief!

i ain't got no basket, said mike, facing round.

then you know where it is.

i don't know nothin' of your basket.

you pulled my hat over my eyes on purpose to steal my basket.

no, i didn't. you insulted me, that's why i did it.

tell me where my basket is, or i'll lick you, said paul, incensed.

i ain't nothin' to do with your basket.

take that, then, for pulling my hat over my eyes, and paul, suiting
the action to the word, dealt mike a staggering blow in the face.

i'll murder you! shouted mike, furiously, dashing at paul with a blow
which might have leveled him, if he had not fended it off.

paul was not quarrelsome, but he knew how to fight, and he was prepared
now to fight in earnest, indignant as he was at the robbery which
entailed upon him a loss he could ill sustain.

i'll give you all you want, he said, resolutely, eyeing mike warily,
and watching a chance to give him another blow.

the contest was brief, being terminated by the sudden and unwelcome
arrival of a policeman.

what's this? he asked authoritatively, surveying the combatants; paul,
with his flushed face, and mike, whose nose was bleeding freely from a
successful blow of his adversary.

he pitched into me for nothin', said mike, glaring at paul, and
rubbing his bloody nose on the sleeve of his ragged coat.

that isn't true, said paul, excitedly. he came up while i was selling
prize packages of candy in front of the post office, and pulled my hat
over my eyes, while another boy grabbed my basket.

you lie! said mike. i don't know nothin' of your basket.

why did you pull his hat over his eyes? asked the policeman.

because he insulted me.

how did he insult you?

he wouldn't trust me till to-morrow.

i don't blame him much for that, said the policeman, who was aware
of mike's shady reputation, having on a former occasion been under
the necessity of arresting him. even without such acquaintance, mike's
general appearance would hardly have recommended him to officer jones.

i'll let you go this time, he said, but if i catch you fighting again
on my beat i'll march you off to the station-house.

mike was glad to escape, though he would almost have been willing to be
arrested if paul could have been arrested also.

the officer walked away, and mike started down the street.

paul followed him.

that didn't suit mike's ideas, as he was anxious to meet jim and divide
the spoils with him.

what are you follerin' me for? he demanded, angrily.

i have my reasons, said paul.

then you'd better stay where you are. your company ain't wanted.

i know that, said paul, but i'm going to follow you till i find my
basket.

what do i know of your basket?

that's what i want to find out.

mike saw, by paul's resolute tone, that he meant what he said. desirous
of shaking him of, he started on a run.



chapter vi

paul as an artist

paul was not slow in following mike. he was a good runner, and would
have had no difficulty in keeping up with his enemy if the streets had
been empty. but to thread his way in and out among the numerous foot
passengers that thronged the sidewalks was not so easy. he kept up
pretty well, however, until, in turning a street corner, he ran at full
speed into a very stout gentleman, whose scanty wind was quite knocked
out of him by the collision. he glared in anger at paul, but could not
at first obtain breath enough to speak.

i beg your pardon, sir, said paul, who, in spite of his desire to
overtake mike, felt it incumbent upon him to stop and offer an apology.

what do you mean, sir, exploded the fat man, at last, by tearing
through the streets like a locomotive? you've nearly killed me.

i am very sorry, sir.

you ought to be. don't you know better than to run at such speed? you
ought to be indicted as a public nuisance.

i was trying to catch a thief, said paul.

trying to catch a thief? how's that? asked the stout gentleman, his
indignation giving way to curiosity.

i was selling packages in front of the post office when he and another
boy came up and stole my basket.

indeed! what were you selling?

prize packages, sir.

what was in them?

candy.

could you make much that way?

about a dollar a day.

i'd rather have given you a dollar than had you run against me with
such violence. i feel it yet.

indeed, sir, i'm very sorry.

well, i'll forgive you, under the circumstances. what's your name?

paul hoffman.

well, i hope you'll get back your basket. some time, if you see me in
the street, come up and let me know. would you know me again?

i think i should, sir.

well, good-morning. i hope you'll catch the thief.

i thank you, sir.

they parted company, but paul did not continue the pursuit. the
conversation in which he had taken part had lasted so long that mike
had had plenty of time to find a refuge, and there would be no use in
following him.

so paul went home.

you are home early, paul, said his mother. surely you haven't sold
out by this time.

no, but all my packages are gone.

how is that?

they were stolen.

tell me about it.

so paul told the story.

that mike was awful mean, said jimmy, indignantly. i'd like to hit
him.

i don't think you would hurt him much, jimmy, said paul, amused at his
little brother's vehemence.

then i wish i was a big, strong boy, said jimmy.

i hope you will be, some time.

how much was your loss, paul? asked his mother.

there were nearly forty packages. they cost me about a dollar, but if
i had sold them all they would have brought me in twice as much. i had
only sold ten packages.

shall you make some more?

no, i think not, said paul. i've got tired of the business. it's
getting poorer every day. i'll go out after dinner, and see if i can't
find something else to do.

you ain't going out now, paul? said jimmy.

no, i'll stop and see you draw a little while.

that's bully. i'm going to try these oxen.

that's a hard picture. i don't think you can draw it, jimmy.

yes, i can, said the little boy, confidently. just see if i don't.

jimmy has improved a good deal, said his mother.

you'll be a great artist one of these days, jimmy, said paul.

i'm going to try, paul, said the little boy. i like it so much.

little jimmy had indeed made surprising progress in drawing. with no
instruction whatever, he had succeeded in a very close and accurate
imitation of the sketches in the drawing books paul had purchased for
him. it was a great delight to the little boy to draw, and hour after
hour, as his mother sat at her work, he sat up to the table, and worked
at his drawing, scarcely speaking a word unless spoken to, so absorbed
was he in his fascinating employment.

paul watched him attentively.

you'll make a bully artist, jimmy, he said, at length, really
surprised at his little brother's proficiency. if you keep on a little
longer, you'll beat me.

i wish you'd draw something, paul, said jimmy. i never saw any of
your drawings.

i am afraid, if you saw mine, it would discourage you, said paul. you
know, i'm older and ought to draw better.

his face was serious, but there was a merry twinkle of fun in his eyes.

of course, i know you draw better, said jimmy, seriously.

what shall i draw? asked paul.

try this horse, paul.

all right! said paul. but you must go away; i don't want you to see
it till it is done.

jimmy left the table, and paul commenced his attempt. now, though paul
is the hero of my story, i am bound to confess that he had not the
slightest talent for drawing, though jimmy did not know it. it was only
to afford his little brother amusement that he now undertook the task.

paul worked away for about five minutes.

it's done, he said.

so quick? exclaimed jimmy, in surprise. how fast you work!

he drew near and inspected paul's drawing. he had no sooner inspected
it than he burst into a fit of laughter. paul's drawing was a very rough
one, and such a horse as he had drawn will never probably be seen until
the race has greatly degenerated.

what's the matter, jimmy? asked paul. don't you like it?

it's awful, paul, said the little boy, almost choking with mirth.

i see how it is, said paul, with feigned resentment. you're jealous of
me because you can't draw as well.

oh, paul, you'll kill me! and jimmy again burst into a fit of
merriment. can't you really draw any better?

no, jimmy, said paul, joining in the laugh. i can't draw any better
than an old cow. you've got all the talent in the family in that line.

but you're smart in other ways, paul, said jimmy, who had a great
admiration of paul, notwithstanding the discovery of his artistic
inferiority.

i'm glad there's one that thinks so, jimmy, said paul. i'll refer to
you when i want a recommendation.

jimmy resumed his drawing, and was proud of the praises which paul
freely bestowed upon him.

i'll get you a harder drawing book when you've got through with these,
 said paul; that is, if i don't get reduced to poverty by having my
stock in trade stolen again.

after a while came dinner. this meal in mrs. hoffman's household usually
came at twelve o'clock. it was a plain, frugal meal always, but on
sunday they usually managed to have something a little better, as they
had been accustomed to do when mr. hoffman was alive.

paul was soon through.

he took his hat from the bureau, and prepared to go out.

i'm going out to try my luck, mother, he said. i'll see if i can't
get into something i like a little better than the prize-package
business.

i hope you'll succeed, paul.

better than i did in drawing horses, eh, jimmy?

yes, i hope so, paul, said the little boy.

don't you show that horse to visitors and pretend it's yours, jimmy.

no danger, paul.

paul went downstairs and into the street. he had no definite plan in
his head, but was ready for anything that might turn up. he did not feel
anxious, for he knew there were plenty of ways in which he could earn
something. he had never tried blacking boots, but still he could do it
in case of emergency. he had sold papers, and succeeded fairly in that
line, and knew he could again. he had pitted himself against other boys,
and the result had been to give him a certain confidence in his own
powers and business abilities. when he had first gone into the street
to try his chances there, it had been with a degree of diffidence. but
knocking about the streets soon gives a boy confidence, sometimes too
much of it; and paul had learned to rely upon himself; but the influence
of a good, though humble home, and a judicious mother, had kept him
aloof from the bad habits into which many street boys are led.

so paul, though his stock in trade had been stolen, and he was obliged
to seek a new kind of business, was by no means disheartened. he walked
a little way downtown, and then, crossing the city hall park, found
himself on broadway.

a little below the astor house he came to the stand of a
sidewalk-merchant, who dealt in neckties. upon an upright framework hung
a great variety of ties of different colors, most of which were sold at
the uniform price of twenty-five cents each.

paul was acquainted with the proprietor of the stand, and, having
nothing else to do, determined to stop and speak to him.



chapter vii

a new business

the proprietor of the necktie stand was a slender, dark-complexioned
young man of about twenty-five, or thereabouts.

his name was george barry. paul had known him for over a year, and
whenever he passed his stand was accustomed to stop and speak with him.

well, george, how's business? asked paul.

fair, said barry. that isn't what's the matter.

what is it, then?

i'm sick. i ought not to be out here to-day.

what's the matter with you?

i've caught a bad cold, and feel hot and feverish. i ought to be at
home and abed.

why don't you go?

i can't leave my business.

it's better to do that than to get a bad sickness.

i suppose it is. i am afraid i am going to have a fever. one minute i'm
hot, another i'm cold. but i can't afford to close up my business.

why don't you get somebody to take your place?

i don't know anybody i could get that i could trust. they'd sell my
goods, and make off with the money.

can you trust me? asked paul, who saw a chance to benefit himself as
well as his friend.

yes, paul, i could trust you, but i'm afraid i couldn't pay you enough
to make it worth while for you to stand here.

i haven't got anything to do just now, said paul. i was in the
prize-package business, but two fellows stole my stock in trade, and i'm
not going into it again. it's about played out. i'm your man. just make
me an offer.

i should like to have you take my place for a day or two, for i know
you wouldn't cheat me.

you may be sure of that.

i am sure. i know you are an honest boy, paul. but i don't know what to
offer you.

how many neckties do you sell a day? asked paul, in a businesslike
tone.

about a dozen on an average.

and how much profit do you make?

it's half profit.

paul made a short calculation. twelve neckties at twenty-five cents each
would bring three dollars. half of this was a dollar and a half.

i'll take your place for half profits, he said.

that's fair, said george barry. i'll accept your offer. can you begin
now?

yes.

then i'll go home and go to bed. it's the best place for me.

you'd better. i'll come round after closing up, and hand over the
money.

all right! you know where i live?

i'm not sure.

no. -- bleecker street.

i'll come up this evening.

george barry walked away, leaving paul in charge of his business.

he did so with perfect confidence. not every boy in paul's circumstances
can be trusted, but he felt sure that paul would do the right thing by
him.

i may as well say, in this connection, that george barry had a mother
living. they occupied two rooms in a lodging-house in bleecker street,
and lived very comfortably. mrs. barry had an allowance of two hundred
dollars a year from a relation. this, with what she earned by sewing,
and her son by his stand, supported them very comfortably, especially
as they provided and cooked their own food, which was, of course, much
cheaper than boarding. still, the loss of the young man's earnings, even
for a short time, would have been felt, though they had a reserve of
a hundred dollars in a savings bank, from which they might draw if
necessary. but george did not like to do this. the arrangement which he
made with paul was a satisfactory one, for with half his usual earnings
they would still be able to keep out of debt, and not be compelled to
draw upon the fund in the bank. of course, something depended on paul's
success as a salesman, but he would not be likely to fall much below
the average amount of sales. so, on the whole, george barry went home
considerably relieved in mind, though his head was throbbing, and he
felt decidedly sick.

arrived at home, his mother, who understood sickness, at once took
measures to relieve him.

don't mind the loss of a few days, george, she said, cheerfully; we
shall be able to get along very well.

it'll only be part loss, mother, he said. i've got paul hoffman to
take my place for half the profits.

paul hoffman! do i know him?

i don't think he has ever been here but i have known him for a year.

can you trust him?

yes, i'm not at all afraid. he is a smart boy, and as honest as he is
smart. i think he will sell nearly as much as i would.

that is an excellent arrangement. you needn't feel uneasy, then.

no, the business will go on right.

i should like to see your salesman.

you'll see him to-night, mother. he's coming round this evening to let
me know how he's got along, and hand over the money he's taken.

you'd better be quiet now, george, and go to sleep, if you can. i'll
make you some warm tea. i think it'll do you good.

meanwhile paul assumed charge of george barry's business. he was sorry
his friend was sick, but he congratulated himself on getting into
business so soon.

it's more respectable than selling prize packages, thought paul. i
wish i had a stand of my own.

he was still a street merchant, but among street merchants there are
grades as well as among merchants whose claim to higher respectability
rests upon having rent to pay. paul felt that it was almost like having
a shop of his own. he had always looked up to george barry as standing
higher than himself in a business way, and he felt that even if his
earnings should not be as great, that it was a step upward to have sole
charge of his stand, if only for a day or two.

paul's ambition was aroused. it was for his interest to make as large
sales as possible. besides, he thought he would like to prove to
george barry that he had made a good selection in appointing him his
substitute.

now, if the truth must be told, george barry himself was not possessed
of superior business ability. he was lacking in energy and push. he
could sell neckties to those who asked for them, but had no particular
talent for attracting trade. he would have been a fair clerk, but was
never likely to rise above a very moderate success. paul was quite
different. he was quick, enterprising, and smart. he was a boy likely to
push his way to success unless circumstances were very much against him.

i'd like to sell more than george barry, he said to himself. i don't
know if i can, but i'm going to try.

the day was half over, and probably the most profitable, so far as
business was concerned. paul had only four or five hours left.

let me see, he said to himself. i ought to sell six neckties to come
up to the average of half a day's sale. i wonder whether i can do it.

as his soliloquy ended, his quick eye detected a young man glancing
at his stock, and he observed that he paused irresolutely, as if half
inclined to purchase.

can't i sell you a necktie to-day? asked paul, promptly.

i don't know, said the other. what do you charge?

you can have your choice for twenty-five cents. that is cheap, isn't
it?

yes, that's cheap. let me look at them.

here's one that will suit your complexion, said paul.

yes, that's a pretty one. i think i'll take it.

you have to pay twice as much in the shops, continued paul, as he
rolled it up. you see, we have no rent to pay, and so we can sell
cheap. you'll save money by always buying your neckties here.

the only objection to that is that i don't live in the city. i am here
only for a day. i live about fifty miles in the country.

then i'll tell you what you'd better do, said paul. lay in half a
dozen, while you are about it. it'll only be a dollar and a half, and
you'll save as much as that by doing it.

i don't know but you are right, said his customer, whom the suggestion
impressed favorably. as you say, it's only a dollar and a half, and
it'll give me a good stock.

let me pick them out for you, said paul, briskly, unless there's
something you see yourself.

i like that one.

all right. what shall be the next?

finally, the young man selected the entire half-dozen, and deposited a
dollar and a half in paul's hands.

come and see me again, said paul, and if you have any friends coming
to the city, send them to me.

i will, said the other.

tell them it's the first stand south of the astor house. then they
won't miss it.

that's a good beginning, said paul to himself, with satisfaction.
half a day's average sales already, and i've only been here fifteen
minutes. let me see, what will my profits be on that? three shillings, i
declare. that isn't bad, now!

paul had reason to be satisfied with himself. if he had not spoken, the
young man would very probably have gone on without purchasing at all,
or, at any rate, remained content with a single necktie. paul's manner
and timely word had increased his purchase sixfold. that is generally
the difference between a poor salesman and one of the first class.
anybody can sell to those who are anxious to buy; but it takes a smart
man to persuade a customer that he wants what otherwise he would go
without. the difference in success is generally appreciated by dealers,
and a superior salesman is generally paid a handsome salary.

i don't believe george barry would have sold that man so many ties,
 thought paul. i hope i shall have as good luck next time.

but this, of course, was not to be expected. it is not every customer
who can be persuaded to buy half-a-dozen ties, even by the most eloquent
salesman. however, in the course of an hour more, paul had sold three
more to single customers. then came a man who bought two. then there was
a lull, and for an hour paul sold none at all. but business improved a
little toward the close of the afternoon, and when it was time to close
up, our young merchant found that he had disposed of fifteen.

my share of the profits will be ninety-three cents, thought paul, with
satisfaction. that isn't bad for an afternoon's work.



chapter viii

a stroke of ill luck

paul transferred his frame of goods to a neighboring office at the end
of the afternoon, the arrangement having been made by george barry, on
first entering into business as a street merchant. this saved a good
deal of trouble, as otherwise he would have been compelled to carry them
home every night and bring them back in the morning.

well, paul, asked his mother, when he returned to supper, have you
found anything to do yet?

i have got employment for a few days, said paul, to tend a necktie
stand. the man that keeps it is sick.

how much does he pay you, paul? asked jimmy.

half the profits. how much do you think i have made this afternoon?

forty cents.

what do you say to ninety-three cents? just look at this, and paul
displayed his earnings.

that is excellent.

i had good luck. generally, i shan't make more in a whole day than
this.

that will be doing very well.

but i shall make more, if i can. one fellow bought six neckties of
me this afternoon. i wish everybody would do that. now, mother, i hope
supper is most ready, for selling neckties has made me hungry.

almost ready, paul.

it was a humble meal, but a good one. there were fresh rolls and butter,
tea and some cold meat. that was all; but the cloth was clean, and
everything looked neat. all did justice to the plain meal, and never
thought of envying the thousands who, in their rich uptown mansions,
were sitting down at the same hour to elaborate dinners costing more
than their entire week's board.

are you going out, paul? asked mrs. hoffman, noticing that he took his
hat.

yes, i must go and see george barry, and carry the money i have
received for sales.

where does he live?

in bleecker street. i shan't be gone long.

paul reached the number which had been given him. it was a large,
four-story house, with the appearance of a barracks.

mr. barry, said the servant, in answer to his question--he lives
upstairs on the fourth floor. room on the right.

paul plodded his way upstairs, and found the room without difficulty.

on knocking, the door was opened by mrs. barry, who looked at him
inquiringly.

does george barry live here? asked paul.

yes. are you the one he left in charge of his business?

paul answered in the affirmative, adding, how is he?

he seems quite feverish. i am afraid he is going to have a fever. it's
fortunate he came home. he was not able to attend to his business.

can i see him?

come in, said mrs. barry.

the room was covered with a worn carpet, but looked neat and
comfortable. there was a cheap sewing-machine in one corner, and some
plain furniture. there was a bedroom opening out of this room, and here
it was that george barry lay upon the bed.

is that paul hoffman, mother? was heard from the bedroom.

yes, said paul, answering for himself.

go in, if you like, said mrs. barry. my son wishes to see you.

how do you feel now, george? asked paul.

not very well, paul. i didn't give up a minute too soon. i think i am
going to have a fever.

that is not comfortable, said paul. still, you have your mother to
take care of you.

i don't know how i should get along without her. can you look after my
business as long as i am sick?

yes; i have nothing else to do.

then that is off my mind. by the way, how many ties did you sell this
afternoon?

fifteen.

what! demanded barry, in surprise. you sold fifteen?

yes.

why, i never sold so many as that in an afternoon.

didn't you? said paul, gratified. then you think i did well?

splendidly. how did you do it?

you see, there was a young man from the country that i persuaded to buy
six, as he could not get them so cheap at home. that was my first sale,
and it encouraged me.

i didn't think you'd sell more than six in the whole afternoon.

nor did i, when i started; but i determined to do my best. i don't
expect to do as well every day.

no, of course not. i've been in the business more than a year; and i
know what it is. some days are very dull.

i've got the money for you. the fifteen ties came to three dollars and
seventy-five cents. i keep one-fourth of this as my commission. that
leaves two dollars and eighty-two cents.

quite correct. however, you needn't give me the money. you may need to
change a bill, or else lose a sale. it will do if you settle with me at
the end of the week.

i see you have confidence in me, george. suppose i should take a fancy
to run away with the money?

i am not afraid.

if i do, i will give you warning a week beforehand.

after a little more conversation, paul withdrew, thinking he might worry
the sick man. he offered to come up the next evening, but george barry
said, it would be too much to expect you to come up every evening. i
shall be satisfied if you come up every other evening.

very well, said paul. then you may expect me saturday. i hope i shall
have some good sales to report, and that i shall find you better.

paul descended to the street, and walked slowly homeward. he couldn't
help wishing that the stand was his own, and the entire profits his.
this would double his income, and enable him to save up money. at
present this was hardly possible. his own earnings had been, and were
likely to continue, very fluctuating.

still, they constituted the main support of the family. his mother made
shirts for an establishment on broadway at twenty-five cents each, which
was more than some establishments paid. she could hardly average more
than one shirt a day, in addition to her household work, and in order
to accomplish this, even, she was obliged to work very steadily all day.
jimmy, of course, earned nothing. not that he was too young. there were
plenty of little newsboys who were as small as he--perhaps smaller.
i have seen boys, who did not appear to be more than four years old,
standing at the corners, crying the news in their childish treble. but
paul was not willing to have jimmy sent out into the streets to undergo
the rough discipline of street life. he was himself of a strong, robust
nature, and did not shrink from the rough and tumble of life. he felt
sure he could make his way, and give as well as receive blows. but jimmy
was shy and retiring, of a timid, shrinking nature, who would suffer
from what would only exhilarate paul, and brace him for the contest.
so it was understood that jimmy was to get an education, studying at
present at home with his mother, who had received a good education, and
that mrs. hoffman and paul were to be the breadwinners. i wish mother
didn't have to sit so steadily at her work, thought paul, many a time.
he resolved some time to relieve her from the necessity; but at present
it was impossible.

to maintain their small family in comfort required all that both could
earn.

the next morning paul started out after breakfast for the street stand,
wondering what success he was destined to meet with.

about the middle of the forenoon mrs. hoffman prepared to go out.

do you think you can stay alone for an hour or two, jimmy? she asked.

yes, mother, answered jimmy, who was deep in a picture which he was
copying from one of the drawing-books paul had bought him. where are
you going mother?

to carry back some work, jimmy. i have got half-a-dozen shirts done,
and must return them, and ask for more.

they ought to pay you more than twenty-five cents apiece, mother. how
long has it taken you to make them?

nearly a week.

that is only a dollar and a half for a week's work.

i know it, jimmy; but they can get plenty to work at that price, so it
won't do for me to complain. i shall be very glad if i can get steady
work, even at that price.

jimmy said no more, and mrs. hoffman, gathering up her bundle, went out.

she had a little more than half a mile to go. this did not require long.
she entered the large door, and advanced to the counter behind which
stood a clerk with a pen behind his ear.

how many? he said, as she laid the bundle upon the counter.

six.

name?

hoffman.

correct. i will look at them.

he opened the bundle hastily, and surveyed the work critically. luckily
there was no fault to find, for mrs. hoffman was a skillful seamstress.

they will do, he said, and, taking from a drawer the stipulated sum,
paid for them.

can i have some more? asked mrs. hoffman, anxiously.

not to-day. we're overstocked with goods made up. we must contract our
manufacture.

this was unexpected, and carried dismay to the heart of the poor woman.
what she could earn was very little but it was important to her.

when do you think you can give me some more work? she asked.

it may be a month or six weeks, he answered, carelessly.

a month or six weeks! to have her supply of work cut off for so long a
time would, indeed, be a dire misfortune. but there was nothing to say.
mrs. hoffman knew very well that no one in the establishment cared for
her necessities. so, with a heavy heart, she started for home, making up
her mind to look elsewhere for work in the afternoon. she could not help
recalling, with sorrow, the time when her husband was living, and they
lived in a pleasant little home, before the shadow of bereavement and
pecuniary anxiety had come to cloud their happiness. still, she was not
utterly cast down. paul had proved himself a manly and a helpful boy,
self-reliant and courageous, and, though they might be pinched, she knew
that as long as he was able to work they would not actually suffer.



chapter ix

a new patron

mrs. hoffman went out in the afternoon, and visited several large
establishments in the hope of obtaining work. but everywhere she was met
with the stereotyped reply, business is so dull that we are obliged to
turn off some who are accustomed to work for us. we have no room for new
hands.

finally she decided that it would be of no use to make any further
applications, and went home, feeling considerably disheartened.

i must find something to do, she said to herself. i cannot throw upon
paul the entire burden of supporting the family.

but it was not easy to decide what to do. there are so few paths open to
a woman like mrs. hoffman. she was not strong enough to take in washing,
nor, if she had been, would paul, who was proud for his mother, though
not for himself, have consented to her doing it. she determined to think
it over during the evening, and make another attempt to get work of some
kind the next day.

i won't tell paul till to-morrow night, she decided. perhaps by that
time i shall have found something to do.

all that day, the first full day in his new business, paul sold
eighteen ties. he was not as successful proportionately as the previous
afternoon. still his share of the profits amounted to a dollar and
twelve cents, and he felt quite satisfied. his sales had been fifty
per cent. more than george barry's average sales, and that was doing
remarkably well, considering that the business was a new one to him.

the next morning about ten o'clock, as he stood behind his stand, he saw
a stout gentleman approaching from the direction of the astor house.
he remembered him as the one with whom he had accidentally come in
collision when he was in pursuit of mike donovan. having been invited to
speak to him, he determined to do so.

good-morning, sir, said paul, politely.

eh? did you speak to me? inquired the stout gentleman.

yes, sir; i bade you good-morning.

good-morning. i don't remember you, though. what's your name?

paul hoffman. don't you remember my running against you a day or two
since?

oho! you're the boy, then. you nearly knocked the breath out of me.

i am very sorry, sir.

of course you didn't mean to. is this your stand?

no, sir; i am tending for the owner, who is sick.

does he pay you well?

he gives me half the profits.

and does that pay you for your labor?

i can earn about a dollar a day.

that is good. it is more than i earned when i was of your age.

indeed, sir!

yes; i was a poor boy, but i kept steadily at work, and now i am rich.

i hope i shall be rich some time, said paul.

you have the same chance that i had.

i don't care so much for myself as for my mother and my little brother.
i should like to become rich for their sake.

so you have a mother and a brother. where do they live?

paul told him.

and you help support them?

yes, sir.

that's a good boy, said the gentleman, approvingly. is your mother
able to earn anything?

not much, sir. she makes shirts for a broadway store, but they only pay
her twenty-five cents apiece.

that's very small. she can sew well, i suppose?

oh, yes, sir; no fault is ever found with her work.

do you think she would make me a dozen shirts?

she would be glad to do so, said paul, quickly, for he knew that his
new acquaintance would pay far more liberally than the broadway firm.

i will give the price i usually pay--ten shillings apiece.

ten shillings in new york currency amount to a dollar and a quarter,
which would be five times the price mrs hoffman had been accustomed to
receive. a dozen shirts would come to fifteen dollars, which to a family
in their circumstances would be a great help.

thank you, sir, said paul. my mother will accept the work thankfully,
and will try to suit you. when shall i come for the cloth?

you may come to my house this evening, and i will give you a pattern,
and an order for the materials on a dry goods dealer in broadway.

where do you live, sir?

no. ---- madison avenue, between thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth
streets. my name is preston. can you remember it?

yes, sir; but i will put it down to make sure.

well, good-morning.

good-morning, sir. i suppose you don't want a tie this morning?

i don't think you keep the kind i am accustomed to wear, said mr.
preston, smiling. i stick to the old fashions, and wear a stock.

the old gentleman had scarcely gone, when two boys of twelve or thirteen
paused before the stand.

that's a bully tie, jeff! said george, the elder of the two. i have a
good mind to buy it.

it won't cost much, said jeff. only twenty-five cents. but i like
that one better.

if you buy one, i will.

all right, said jeff, whose full name was jefferson. we can wear them
to dancing-school this afternoon.

so the two boys bought a necktie, and this, in addition to previous
sales, made six sold during the morning.

i hope i shall do as well as i did yesterday, thought paul. if i
can make nine shillings every day i won't complain. it is better than
selling prize-packages.

paul seemed likely to obtain his wish, since at twelve o'clock, when he
returned home to dinner, he had sold ten ties, making rather more than
half of the previous day's sales.

mrs. hoffman had been out once more, but met with no better success than
before. there seemed to be no room anywhere for a new hand. at several
places she had seen others, out of employment like herself, who were
also in quest of work. the only encouragement she received was that
probably in a month or six weeks business might so far improve that she
could obtain work. but to mrs. hoffman it was a serious matter to remain
idle even four weeks. she reflected that paul's present employment was
only temporary, and that he would be forced to give up his post as
soon as george barry should recover his health, which probably would
be within a week or two. she tried in vain to think of some temporary
employment, and determined, in case she should be unsuccessful in the
afternoon, which she hardly anticipated, to consult paul what she had
better do.

paul noticed when he came in that his mother looked more sober and
thoughtful than usual.

have you a headache, mother? he inquired.

no, paul, she said, smiling faintly.

something troubles you, i am sure, continued paul.

you are right, paul, said mrs. hoffman, though i didn't mean to tell
you till evening.

what is it? asked paul, anxiously.

when i carried back the last shirts i made for duncan & co., they told
me i couldn't have any more for a month or six weeks.

that will give you some time to rest, mother, said paul, who wanted to
keep back his good news for a while.

but i can't afford to rest, paul.

you forget that i am earning money, mother. i am sure i can earn a
dollar a day.

i know you are a good, industrious boy, paul, and i don't know how we
should get along without you. but it is necessary for me to do my part,
though it is small.

don't be anxious, mother; i am sure we can get along.

but i am not willing that the whole burden of supporting the family
should come upon you. besides, you are not sure how long you can retain
your present employment.

i know that, mother; but something else will be sure to turn up. if i
can't do anything else, i can turn bootblack, though i would prefer
something else. there is no chance of my being out of work long.

there are fewer things for me to do, said his mother, but perhaps you
can think of something. i shall go out this afternoon, and try my luck
once more. if i do not succeed, i will consult with you this evening.

suppose i tell you that i have work for you, enough to last for two or
three weeks, that will pay five times as well as the work you have been
doing; what would you say to that? asked paul, smiling.

are you in earnest, paul? asked his mother, very much surprised.

quite in earnest, mother. there's a gentleman up-town that wants a
dozen shirts made, and is willing to pay ten shillings apiece.

ten shillings! why, that's a dollar and a quarter.

of course it is. i told him i thought you would accommodate him.

you are sure i can get the work to do?

certainly. i am to go up to his house this evening and get the pattern
and an order for the materials.

it seems too good to be true, said his mother. why, i can earn at
least a dollar a day.

then you will be doing as well as i am.

tell me how you heard of it, paul, said mrs. hoffman.

paul told the story of the manner in which he formed mr. preston's
acquaintance.

it's lucky you ran into him, paul, said jimmy.

he didn't think so at the time, said paul, laughing. he said i nearly
knocked the breath out of him.

you won't go out this afternoon, mother, will you? asked jimmy.

no, it will not be necessary now; i didn't think this morning that such
a piece of good luck was in store for, me.



chapter x

another loss

after supper paul brushed his clothes carefully and prepared to go to
the address given him by mr. preston. he decided to walk one way, not
wishing to incur the expenses of two railroad fares.

the distance was considerable, and it was nearly eight o'clock when he
arrived at his destination.

paul found himself standing before a handsome house of brown stone.
he ascended the steps, and inquired, on the door being opened, if mr.
preston was at home.

i'll see, said the servant.

she returned in a short time, and said: he says you may come upstairs.

paul followed the servant, who pointed out a door at the head of the
first staircase.

paul knocked, and, hearing come in from within, he opened the door and
entered.

he found himself in a spacious chamber, handsomely furnished. mr.
preston, in dressing-gown and slippers, sat before a cheerful, open
fire.

come and sit down by the fire, he said, sociably.

thank you, sir, i am warm with walking, and paul took a seat near the
door.

i am one of the cold kind, said mr. preston, and have a fire earlier
than most people. you come about the shirts, i suppose?

yes, sir.

will your mother undertake them?

with pleasure, sir. she can no longer get work from the shop.

business dull, i suppose?

yes, sir.

then i am glad i thought of giving her the commission. how's business
with you to-day, eh?

pretty good, sir.

how many neckties did you sell?

nineteen, sir.

and how much do you get for that?

nine shillings and a half--a dollar and eighteen cents.

that's pretty good for a boy like you. when i was of your age i was
working on a farm for my board and clothes.

were you, sir? asked paul, interested.

yes, i was bound out till i was twenty-one. at the end of that time i
was to receive a hundred dollars and a freedom suit to begin the world
with. that wasn't a very large capital, eh?

no, sir.

but the death of my employer put an end to my apprenticeship at the
age of eighteen. i hadn't a penny of money and was thrown upon my own
resources. however, i had a pair of good strong arms, and a good stock
of courage. i knew considerable about farming, but i didn't like it. i
thought i should like trade better. so i went to the village merchant,
who kept a small dry-goods store, and arranged with him to supply me
with a small stock of goods, which i undertook to sell on commission for
him. his business was limited, and having confidence in my honesty, he
was quite willing to intrust me with what i wanted. so i set out with my
pack on my back and made a tour of the neighboring villages.

paul listened with eager interest. he had his own way to make, and it
was very encouraging to find that mr. preston, who was evidently rich
and prosperous, was no better off at eighteen than he was now.

you will want to know how i succeeded. well, at first only moderately;
but i think i had some tact in adapting myself to the different classes
of persons with whom i came in contact; at any rate, i was always
polite, and that helped me. so my sales increased, and i did a good
thing for my employer as well as myself. he would have been glad to
employ me for a series of years, but i happened to meet a traveling
salesman of a new york wholesale house, who offered to obtain me a
position similar to his own. as this would give me a larger field and
larger profits, i accepted gladly, and so changed the nature of my
employment. i became very successful. my salary was raised from time to
time, till it reached five thousand dollars. i lived frugally and saved
money, and at length bought an interest in the house by which i had been
so long employed. i am now senior partner, and, as you may suppose, very
comfortably provided for.

do you know why i have told you this? asked mr. preston, noticing the
eagerness with which paul had listened.

i don't know, sir; but i have been very much interested.

it is because i like to give encouragement to boys and young men who
are now situated as i used to be. i think you are a smart boy.

thank you, sir.

and, though you are poor, you can lift yourself to prosperity, if you
are willing to work hard enough and long enough.

i am not afraid of work, said paul, promptly.

no, i do not believe you are. i can tell by a boy's face, and you have
the appearance of one who is willing to work hard. how long have you
been a street peddler?

about a year, sir. before that time my father was living, and i was
kept at school.

you will find the street a school, though of a different kind, in which
you can learn valuable lessons. if you can get time in the evening,
however, it will be best to keep up your school studies.

i am doing that now, sir.

that is well. and now, about the shirts. did your mother say how long
it would take her to make them?

about three weeks, i think, sir. will that be soon enough?

that will do. perhaps it will be well, however, to bring half the
number whenever they are finished.

all right, sir.

i suppose your mother can cut them out if i send a shirt as a pattern?

yes, sir.

mr. preston rose, and, going to a bureau, took therefrom a shirt which
he handed to paul. he then wrote a few lines on a slip of paper, which
he also handed our hero.

that is an order on barclay & co., he explained, for the requisite
materials. if either you or your mother presents it, they will be given
you.

very good, sir, said paul.

he took his cap, and prepared to go.

good-evening, mr. preston, he said.

good-evening. i shall expect you with the shirts when they are ready.

paul went downstairs and into the street, thinking that mr. preston was
very sociable and agreeable. he had fancied that rich men were generally
stuck up, but about mr. preston there seemed an absence of all
pretense. paul's ambition was aroused when he thought of the story he
had heard, and he wondered whether it would be possible for him to raise
himself to wealth and live in as handsome a house as mr. preston. he
thought what a satisfaction it would be if the time should ever come
when he could free his mother from the necessity of work, and give
little jimmy a chance to develop his talent for drawing. however, such
success must be a long way off, if it ever came.

he had intended to ride home, but his mind was so preoccupied that he
forgot all about it, and had got some distance on his way before it
occurred to him. then, not feeling particularly tired, he concluded to
keep on walking, as he had commenced.

it will save me six cents, he reflected, and that is something. if i
am ever going to be a prosperous merchant, i must begin to save now.

so he kept on walking. passing the cooper institute, he came into the
bowery, a broad and busy street, the humble neighbor of broadway, to
which it is nearly parallel.

he was still engaged in earnest thought, when he felt a rude slap on the
back. looking round, he met the malicious glance of mike donovan, who
probably would not have ventured on such a liberty if he had not been
accompanied by a boy a head taller than himself, and, to judge from
appearances, of about the same character.

what did you do that for, mike? demanded paul.

none of your business. i didn't hurt you, did i? returned mike,
roughly.

no, but i don't care to be hit that way by you.

so you're putting on airs, are you?

no, i don't do that, returned paul; but i don't care about having
anything to do with you.

that's because you've got a new shirt, is it? sneered mike.

it isn't mine.

that's what i thought. who did you steal it from?

do you mean to insult me, mike donovan? demanded paul, angrily.

just as you like, said mike, independently.

if you want to know why i don't want to have anything to do with you, i
will tell you.

tell ahead.

because you're a thief.

if you say that again, i'll lick you, said mike, reddening with anger.

it's true. you stole my basket of candy the other day, and that isn't
the only time you've been caught stealing.

i'll give you the worst licking you ever had. do you want to fight?
 said mike, flourishing his fist.

no, i don't, said paul. some time when i haven't a bundle, i'll
accommodate you.

you're a coward! sneered mike, gaining courage as he saw paul was not
disposed for an encounter.

i don't think i am, said paul, coolly.

i'll hold your shirt, said mike's companion, with a grin, if you want
to fight.

paul, however, did not care to intrust the shirt to a stranger of so
unprepossessing an appearance.

he, therefore, attempted to pass on. but mike, encouraged by his
reluctance, stepped up and shook his fist within an inch of paul's nose,
calling him at the same time a coward. this was too much for paul's
self-restraint. he dropped the shirt and pitched into mike in so
scientific a manner that the latter was compelled to retreat, and
finally to flee at the top of his speed, not without having first
received several pretty hard blows.

i don't think he will meddle with me again, said paul to himself, as
he pulled down the sleeves of his jacket.

he walked back, and looked for the shirt which he had laid down before
commencing the combat. but he looked in vain. nothing was to be seen
of the shirt or of mike's companion. probably both had disappeared
together.



chapter xi

barclay & co.

the loss of the shirt was very vexatious. it was not so much the value
of it that paul cared for, although this was a consideration by no means
to be despised by one in his circumstances; but it had been lent as a
pattern, and without it his mother would be unable to make mr. preston's
shirts. as to recovering it, he felt that there was little chance of
this. besides, it would involve delay, and his mother could not afford
to remain idle. paul felt decidedly uncomfortable. again mike donovan
had done him an injury, and this time of a more serious nature than
before.

what should he do?

there seemed but one answer to this question. he must go back to mr.
preston, explain the manner in which he had lost his shirt, and ask him
for another, promising, of course, to supply the place of the one lost.
he was not sure whether mr. preston would accept this explanation. he
might think it was only an attempt to defraud him. but, at any rate, it
seemed the only thing to do, and it must be done at once. he entered a
passing car, for it was too late to walk.

i wish i had taken the car down, thought paul. then i shouldn't have
lost the shirt.

but it was too late for regrets now. he must do the best that remained
to him.

it was nearly ten o'clock when paul once more stood before the door of
mr. preston's boarding-place. he rang the bell and asked to see him.

you have been here before this evening? said the servant.

yes.

then you know the room. you can walk right up.

paul went upstairs and knocked at mr. preston's room. he was bidden to
come in, and did so.

mr. preston looked up with surprise.

i suppose you are surprised to see me, said paul, rather awkwardly.

why, yes. i did not anticipate that pleasure quite so soon, said mr.
preston, smiling.

i am afraid it won't be a pleasure, for i bring bad news.

bad news? repeated the gentleman, rather startled.

yes; i have lost the shirt you gave me.

oh, is that all? said mr. preston, looking relieved. but how did you
lose it?

i was walking home down the bowery, when two fellows met me. one of
them, mike donovan, forced me into a fight. i gave him a licking, added
paul, with satisfaction; but when it was all over, i found the other
fellow had run off with the shirt.

i don't believe it will fit him, said mr. preston, laughing.

as the speaker probably weighed two hundred and fifty pounds, it was,
indeed, rather doubtful. paul couldn't help laughing himself at the
thought.

you were certainly unlucky, said mr. preston. did you know the boy
you fought with?

yes, sir; he once before stole my stock of candy, when i was in the
prize-package business.

that was the day we got acquainted, remarked mr. preston.

yes, sir.

he doesn't seem to be a very particular friend of yours.

no; he hates me, mike does, though i don't know why. but i hope you
won't be angry with me for losing the shirt?

no; it doesn't seem to be your fault, only your misfortune.

i was afraid you might think i had made up the story, and only wanted
to get an extra shirt from you.

no, my young friend; i have some faith in physiognomy, and you have an
honest face. i don't believe you would deceive me.

no, i wouldn't, said paul, promptly. if you will trust me with
another shirt, mother will make you an extra one to make up for the one
i have lost.

certainly you shall have the extra shirt, but you needn't supply the
place of the one lost.

it is only fair that i should.

that may be, and i am glad you made the offer, but the loss is of
little importance to me. it was no fault of yours that you lost it, and
you shall not suffer for it.

you are very kind, sir, said paul, gratefully.

only just, paul.

mr. preston went to the bureau, and drew out another shirt, which he
handed to paul.

let me suggest, my young friend, he said, that you ride home this
time. it is late, and you might have another encounter with your friend.
i should like to see him with the shirt on, and mr. preston laughed
heartily at the thought.

paul decided to follow his patron's advice. he had no idea of running
any more risk in the matter. he accordingly walked to fourth avenue and
got on board the car.

it was nearly eleven o'clock when he reached home. as it was never
his habit to stay out late, his mother had become alarmed at his long
absence.

what kept you so late, paul? she asked.

i'll tell you, pretty soon, mother. here's the shirt that is to serve
as a pattern. can you cut out the new shirts by it?

mrs. hoffman examined it attentively.

yes, she said; there will be no difficulty about that. mr. preston
must be a pretty large man.

yes, he is big enough for an alderman; but he is very kind and
considerate, and i like him. you shall judge for yourself when i tell
you what happened this evening.

it will not be necessary to tell paul's adventure over again. his
mother listened with pardonable indignation against mike donovan and his
companion.

i hope you won't have anything to do with that bad boy, paul, she
said.

i shan't, if i can help it, said paul. i didn't want to speak to him
to-night, but i couldn't help myself. oh, i forgot to say, when half the
shirts are ready, i am to take them to mr. preston.

i think i can make one a day.

there is no need of working so steadily, mother. you will be well paid,
you know.

that is true; and for that reason i shall work more cheerfully. i wish
i could get paid as well for all my work.

perhaps mr. preston will recommend you to his friends, and you can get
more work that way.

i wish i could.

i will mention it to him, when i carry back the last half dozen.

is he going to send the cloth?

i nearly forgot that, too. i have an order on barclay & co. for the
necessary amount of cloth. i can go up there to-morrow morning and get
it.

that will take you from your work, paul.

well, i can close up for a couple of hours.

i don't think that will be necessary. i will go up myself and present
the order, and get them to send it home for me.

will they do that?

it is their custom. or, if the bundle isn't too large. i can bring it
home myself in the car.

that's all right, then. and now, mother, as it's past eleven o'clock, i
think we may as well both go to bed.

the next day paul went as usual to his business, and mrs. hoffman, after
clearing away the breakfast, put on her bonnet and shawl, and prepared
to go for the materials for the shirts.

the retail store of barclay & co. is of great size, and ranks among the
most important in new york. it was not so well filled when mrs. hoffman
entered as it would be later. she was directed to the proper counter,
where she presented the order, signed by mr. preston. as he was a
customer of long standing, there was no difficulty about filling the
order. a bundle was made up, which, as it contained the materials for
twelve shirts, necessarily was of considerable size.

here is your bundle, ma'am, said the clerk.

mrs. hoffman's strength was slender, and she did not feel able to carry
the heavy bundle offered her. even if she took the car, she would be
obliged to carry it a portion of the way, and she felt that it would
overtask her strength.

don't you send bundles? she asked.

sometimes, said the clerk, looking superciliously at the modest attire
of the poor widow, and mentally deciding that she was not entitled to
much consideration. had she been richly dressed, he would have been very
obsequious, and insisted on sending home the smallest parcel. but there
are many who have two rules of conduct, one for the rich, and quite
a different one for the poor, and among these was the clerk who was
attending upon mrs. hoffman.

then, said mrs. hoffman, i should like to have you send this.

it's a great deal of trouble to send everything, said the clerk,
impertinently.

this bundle is too heavy for me to carry, said the widow,
deprecatingly.

i suppose we can send it, said the clerk, ill-naturedly, if you
insist upon it.

meanwhile, though he had not observed it, his employer had approached,
and heard the last part of the colloquy. he was considered by some as
a hard man, but there was one thing he always required of those in his
employ; that was to treat all purchasers with uniform courtesy, whatever
their circumstances.

are you objecting to sending this lady's bundle? said mr. barclay,
sternly.

the clerk looked up in confusion.

i told her we would send it, he stammered.

i have heard what passed. you have been deficient in politeness. if
this happens again, you leave my employ.

i will take your address, said the clerk, in a subdued tone.

mrs. hoffman gave it, and left the store, thankful for the interference
of the great merchant who had given his clerk a lesson which the latter,
as he valued his situation, found it advisable to bear in mind.



chapter xii

the barrel thief

while mike donovan was engaged in his contest with paul, his companion
had quietly walked off with the shirt. it mattered very little to him
which party conquered, as long as he carried off the spoils. his conduct
in the premises was quite as unsatisfactory to mike as it was to paul.
when mike found himself in danger of being overpowered, he appealed
to his companion for assistance, and was incensed to see him coolly
disregarding the appeal, and selfishly appropriating the booty.

the mane thafe! he exclaimed after the fight was over, and he was
compelled to retreat. he let me be bate, and wouldn't lift his finger
to help me. i'd like to put a head on him, i would.

just at that moment mike felt quite as angry with his friend, jerry
mcgaverty, as with his late opponent.

the shirt's mine, fair, he said to himself, and i'll make jerry give
it to me.

but jerry had disappeared, and mike didn't know where to look for him.
in fact, he had entered a dark alleyway, and, taking the shirt from the
paper in which it was wrapped, proceeded to examine his prize.

the unusual size struck him.

by the powers, he muttered, it's big enough for me great-grandfather
and all his children. i wouldn't like to pay for the cloth it tuck to
make it. but i'll wear it, anyway.

jerry was not particular as to an exact fit. his nether garments were
several sizes too large for him, and the shirt would complete his
costume appropriately. he certainly did need a new shirt, for the one
he had on was the only article of the kind he possessed, and was so far
gone that its best days, if it ever had any, appeared to date back to
a remote antiquity. it had been bought cheap in baxter street, its
previous history being unknown.

jerry decided to make the change at once. the alley afforded a
convenient place for making the transfer. he accordingly pulled off the
ragged shirt he wore and put on the article he had purloined from paul.
the sleeves were too long, but he turned up the cuffs, and the ample
body he tucked inside his pants.

it fits me too much, soliloquized jerry, as he surveyed himself after
the exchange. i could let out the half of it, and have enough left for
meself. anyhow, it's clane, and it came chape enough.

he came out of the alley, leaving his old shirt behind him. even if it
had been worth carrying away, jerry saw no use in possessing more than
one shirt. it was his habit to wear one until it was ready to drop
off from him, and then get another if he could. there is a practical
convenience in this arrangement, though there are also objections which
will readily occur to the reader.

on the whole, though the shirt fitted him too much, as he expressed it,
he regarded himself complacently.

the superabundant material gave the impression of liberal expenditure
and easy circumstances, since a large shirt naturally costs more than
a small one. so jerry, as he walked along the bowery, assumed a jaunty
air, precisely such as some of my readers may when they have a new suit
to display. his new shirt was quite conspicuous, since he was encumbered
neither with vest nor coat.

mike, feeling sore over his defeat, met jerry the next morning on
chatham street. his quick eye detected the improved state of his
friend's apparel, and his indignation rose, as he reflected that jerry
had pocketed the profits while the hard knocks had been his.

jerry! he called out.

jerry did not see fit to heed the call. he was sensible that mike had
something to complain of, and he was in no hurry to meet his reproaches.

jerry mcgaverty! called mike, coming near.

oh, it's you, mike, is it? answered jerry, unable longer to keep up
the pretense of not hearing.

yes, it's me, said mike. what made you leave me for last night?

i didn't want to interfere betwane two gintlemen, said jerry, with a
grin. did you mash him, mike?

no, said mike, sullenly, he mashed me. why didn't you help me?

i thought you was bating him, so, as i had some business to attind to,
i went away.

you went away wid the shirt.

yes, i took it by mistake. ain't it an illigant fit?

it's big enough for two of you.

maybe i'll grow to it in time, said jerry.

and how much are you goin' to give me for my share? demanded mike.

say that ag'in, said jerry.

mike repeated it.

i thought maybe i didn't hear straight. it ain't yours at all. didn't i
take it?

you wouldn't have got it if i hadn't fit with paul.

that ain't nothin' to me, said jerry. the shirt's mine, and i'll kape
it.

mike felt strongly tempted to put a head on jerry, whatever that may
mean; but, as jerry was a head taller already, the attempt did not seem
quite prudent. he indulged in some forcible remarks, which, however, did
not disturb jerry's equanimity.

i'll give you my old shirt, mike, he said, if you can find it. i left
it in an alley near the old bowery.

i don't want the dirty rag, said mike, contemptuously.

finally a compromise was effected, jerry offering to help mike on the
next occasion, and leave the spoils in his hands.

i have to chronicle another adventure of jerry's, in which he was
less fortunate than he had been in the present case. he was a genuine
vagabond, and lived by his wits, being too lazy to devote himself to
any regular street employment, as boot blacking or selling newspapers.
occasionally he did a little work at each of these, but regular,
persistent industry was out of his line. he was a drone by inclination,
and a decided enemy to work. on the subject of honesty his principles
were far from strict. if he could appropriate what did not belong to him
he was ready to do so without scruple. this propensity had several times
brought him into trouble, and he had more than once been sent to reside
temporarily on blackwell's island, from which he had returned by no
means improved.

mike was not quite so much of a vagabond as his companion. he could work
at times, though he did not like it, and once pursued the vocation of a
bootblack for several months with fair success.

but jerry's companionship was doing him no good, and it seemed likely
that eventually he would become quite as shiftless as jerry himself.

jerry, having no breakfast, strolled down to one of the city markets. he
frequently found an opportunity of stealing here, and was now in search
of such a chance. he was a dexterous and experienced barrel thief,
a term which it may be necessary to explain. barrels, then, have a
commercial value, and coopers will generally pay twenty-five cents
for one in good condition. this is enough, in the eyes of many a young
vagabond, to pay for the risk incurred in stealing one.

jerry prowled round the market for some time, seeking a good opportunity
to walk off with an apple or banana, or something eatable. but the
guardians of the stands seemed unusually vigilant, and he was compelled
to give up the attempt, as involving too great risk. jerry was hungry,
and hunger is an uncomfortable feeling. he began to wish he had remained
satisfied with his old shirt, dirty as it was, and carried the new one
to some of the baxter street dealers, from whom he could perhaps have
got fifty cents for it. now, fifty cents would have paid for a breakfast
and a couple of cigars, and those just now would have made jerry happy.

what a fool i was not to think of it! he said. the old shirt would do
me, and i could buy a bully breakfast wid the money i'd get for this.

just at this moment he espied an empty barrel--a barrel apparently quite
new and in an unguarded position. he resolved to take it, but the affair
must be managed slyly.

he lounged up to the barrel, and leaned upon it indolently. then, in
apparent unconsciousness, he began to turn it, gradually changing its
position. if observed, he could easily deny all felonious intentions.
this he kept up till he got round the corner, when, glancing around to
see if he was observed, he quickly lifted it on his shoulder and marched
off.

all this happened without his being observed by the owner of the barrel.
but a policeman, who chanced to be going his rounds, had been a witness
of jerry's little game. he remained quiet till jerry's intentions became
evident, then walked quietly up and put his hand on his shoulder.

put down that barrel! he said, authoritatively.

jerry had been indulging in visions of the breakfast he would get with
the twenty-five cents he expected to obtain for the barrel, and the
interruption was not an agreeable one. but he determined to brazen it
out if possible.

what for will i put it down? he said.

because you have stolen it, that's why.

no, said jerry, i'm carrying it round to my boss. it's his.

where do you work?

in fourth street, said jerry, at random.

what number?

no. 136.

then your boss will have to get some one in your place, for you will
have to come with me.

what for?

i saw you steal the barrel. you're a barrel thief, and this isn't the
first time you've been caught at it. carry back the barrel to the place
you took it from and then come with me.

jerry tried to beg off, but without avail.

at that moment mike donovan lounged up. when he saw his friend in
custody, he felt a degree of satisfaction, remembering the trick jerry
had played on him.

where are you goin', jerry? he asked, with a grin, as he passed him.
did ye buy that barrel to kape your shirt in?

jerry scowled but thought it best not to answer, lest his unlawful
possession of the shirt might also be discovered, and lead to a longer
sentence.

he's goin' down to the island to show his new shirt, thought mike,
with a grin. maybe he'll set the fashion there.

mike was right. jerry was sent to the island for two months, there
introducing mr. preston's shirt to company little dreamed of by its
original proprietor.



chapter xiii

out of business

the next day mrs. hoffman commenced work upon mr. preston's shirts. she
worked with much more cheerfulness now that she was sure of obtaining a
liberal price for her labor. as the shirts were of extra size, she found
herself unable to finish one in a day, as she had formerly done, but
had no difficulty in making four in a week. this, however, gave her five
dollars weekly, instead of a dollar and a half as formerly. now, five
dollars may not seem a very large sum to some of my young readers, but
to mrs. hoffman it seemed excellent compensation for a week's work.

if i could only earn as much every week, she said to paul on saturday
evening, i should feel quite rich.

your work will last three weeks, mother, and perhaps at the end of that
time some of mr. preston's friends may wish to employ you.

i hope they will.

how much do you think i have made? continued paul.

six dollars.

seven dollars and a half.

so between us we have earned over twelve dollars.

i wish i could earn something, said little jimmy, looking up from his
drawing.

there's time enough for that, jimmy. you are going to be a great artist
one of these days.

do you really think i shall? asked the little boy, wistfully.

i think there is a good chance of it. let me see what you are drawing.

the picture upon which jimmy was at work represented a farmer standing
upright in a cart, drawn by a sturdy, large-framed horse. the copy
bore a close resemblance to the original, even in the most difficult
portions--the face and expression, both in the man and the horse, being
carefully reproduced.

this is wonderful, jimmy, exclaimed paul, in real surprise. didn't
you find it hard to get the man's face just right?

rather hard, said jimmy; i had to be careful, but i like best the
parts where i have to take the most pains.

i wish i could afford to hire a teacher for you, said paul. perhaps,
if mother and i keep on earning so much money, we shall be able to some
time.

by the middle of the next week six of the shirts were finished, and
paul, as had been agreed upon, carried them up to mr. preston. he was
fortunate enough to find him at home.

i hope they will suit you, said paul.

i can see that the sewing is excellent, said mr. preston, examining
them. as to the fit, i can tell better after i have tried one on.

mother made them just like the one you sent; but if there is anything
wrong, she will, of course, be ready to alter them.

if they are just like the pattern, they will be sure to suit me.

and now, my young friend, he added, let me know how you are getting
on in your own business.

i am making a dollar a day, sometimes a little more.

that is very good.

yes, sir; but it won't last long.

i believe you told me that the stand belonged to some one else.

yes, sir; i am only tending it in his sickness; but he is getting
better, and when he gets about again, i shall be thrown out of
business.

but you don't look like one who would remain idle long.

no, sir; i shall be certain to find something to do, if it is only
blacking boots.

have you ever been in that business?

i've tried about everything, said paul, laughing.

i suppose you wouldn't enjoy boot-blacking much?

no, sir; but i would rather do that than be earning nothing.

you are quite right there, and i am glad you have no false shame in
the matter. there are plenty who have. for instance, a stout,
broad-shouldered young fellow applied to me thus morning for a
clerkship. he said he had come to the city in search of employment, and
had nearly expended all his money without finding anything to do. i
told him i couldn't give him a clerkship, but was in want of a porter. i
offered him the place at two dollars per day. he drew back, and said he
should not be willing to accept a porter's place.

he was very foolish, said paul.

so i thought. i told him that if such were his feelings, i could not
help him. perhaps he may regret his refusal, when he is reduced to his
last penny. by the way, whenever you have to give up your stand, you may
come to me, and i will see what i can do for you.

thank you, sir.

and now, about these shirts; i believe i agreed to pay a dollar and a
quarter each.

yes, sir.

as they are of extra size, i think i ought to pay twelve shillings,
instead of ten.

my mother thinks herself well paid at ten shillings.

there must be a great deal of work about one. twelve shillings are none
too much, and mr. preston placed nine dollars in paul's hand.

thank you, said paul, gratefully. my mother will consider herself
very lucky.

when mrs. hoffman received from paul a dollar and a half more than she
anticipated, she felt in unusually good spirits. she had regretted the
loss of her former poorly paid work, but it appeared that her seeming
misfortune had only prepared the way for greater prosperity. the trouble
was that it would not last. still, it would tide over the dull time, and
when this job was over, she might be able to resume her old employment.
at any rate, while the future seemed uncertain, she did not feel like
increasing her expenditures on account of her increased earnings, but
laid carefully away three-quarters of her receipts to use hereafter in
case of need.

meanwhile, paul continued to take care of george barry's business. he
had been obliged to renew the stock, his large sales having materially
reduced it. twice a week he went up to see his principal to report
sales. george barry could not conceal the surprise he felt at paul's
success.

i never thought you would do so well, he said. you beat me.

i suppose it's because i like it, said paul. then, as i get only half
the profits, i have to work the harder to make fair wages.

it is fortunate for my son that he found you to take his place,
 said mrs. barry. he could not afford to lose all the income from his
business.

it is a good thing for both of us, said paul. i was looking for a job
just when he fell sick.

what had you been doing before?

i was in the prize-package business, but that got played out, and i
was a gentleman at large, seeking for a light, genteel business that
wouldn't require much capital.

i shall be able to take my place pretty soon now, said the young man.
i might go to-morrow, but mother thinks it imprudent.

better get back your strength first, george, said his mother, or you
may fall sick again.

but her son was impatient of confinement and anxious to get to work
again. so, two days afterward, about the middle of the forenoon, paul
was surprised by seeing george barry get out of a broadway omnibus, just
in front of the stand.

can i sell you a necktie, mr. barry? he asked, in a joke.

i almost feel like a stranger, said barry, it's so long since i have
been here.

do you feel strong enough to take charge now? asked paul.

i am not so strong as i was, and the walk from our rooms would tire me;
but i think if i rode both ways for the present i shall be able to get
along.

then you won't need me any longer?

i would like to have you stay with me to-day. i don't know how i shall
hold out.

all right! i'll stop.

george barry remained in attendance the rest of the day. he found that
his strength had so far returned that he should be able to manage alone
hereafter, and he told paul so.

i am glad you are well again, george, said paul. it must have been
dull work staying at home sick.

yes, it was dull; but i felt more comfortable from knowing that you
were taking my place. if i get sick again i will send for you.

i hope you won't get sick; but if you do, i will do what i can to help
you.

so the two parted on the best of terms. each had been of service to the
other, and neither had cause to complain.

well, said paul to himself, i am out of work again. what shall i go
at next?

it was six o'clock, and there was nothing to be done till the morrow. he
went slowly homeward, revolving this subject in his mind. he knew that
he need not remain idle. he could black boots, or sell newspapers, if
nothing better offered, and he thought it quite possible that he might
adopt the latter business, for a few days at least. he had not forgotten
mr. preston's injunction to let him know when he got out of business;
but, as the second half dozen shirts would be ready in three or four
days, he preferred to wait till then, and not make a special call on mr
preston. he had considerable independence of feeling, and didn't like
to put himself in the position of one asking a favor, though he had no
objection to accept one voluntarily offered.

well, mother, he said, entering his humble home, i am out of
business.

has george recovered, then?

yes, he was at the stand to-day, but wanted me to stay with him till
this evening.

oh, i'm so sorry! said jimmy.

sorry that george has got well? for shame, jimmy!

no, i don't mean that, paul. i am sorry you are out of work.

i shall find plenty to do, jimmy. perhaps mr. stewart will take me in
as senior partner, if i ask him.

i don't think he will, said jimmy, laughing.

then perhaps i can get a few scholars in drawing. can't you recommend
me?

i am afraid not, paul, unless you have improved a good deal.



chapter xiv

the diamond ring

paul was up betimes the next morning. he had made up his mind for a
few days, at least, to sell newspapers, and it was necessary in this
business to begin the day early. he tool a dollar with him and invested
a part of it in a stock of dailies. he posted himself in printing house
square, and began to look out for customers. being an enterprising
boy, he was sure to meet with fair success in any business which he
undertook. so it happened that at ten o'clock he had sold out his stock
of papers, and realized a profit of fifty cents.

it was getting late for morning papers, and there was nothing left to do
till the issue of the first edition of the afternoon papers.

i'll go down and see how george barry is getting along, thought paul.

he crossed broadway and soon reached the familiar stand.

how's business, george? he inquired.

fair, said barry. i've sold four ties.

how do you feel?

i'm not so strong as i was, yet. i get tired more easily. i don't think
i shall stay in this business long.

you don't? what will you do then?

i've got a chance in philadelphia, or i shall have by the first of the
month.

what sort of a chance?

mother got a letter yesterday from a cousin of hers who has a store
on chestnut street. he offers to take me as a clerk, and give me ten
dollars a week at first, and more after a while.

that's a good offer. i should like to get one like it.

i'll tell you what, paul, you'd better buy out my stand. you know how
to sell ties, and can make money.

there's only one objection, george.

what's that?

i haven't got any capital.

it don't need much.

how much?

i'll sell out all my stock at cost price.

how much do you think there is?

about twenty-five dollars' worth. then there is the frame, which is
worth, say ten dollars, making thirty-five in all. that isn't much.

it's more than i've got. i'll tell you what i'll do. i'll take it, and
pay you five dollars down and the rest in one month.

i would take your offer, paul, but i need all the money how. it will be
expensive moving to philadelphia and i shall want all i can get.

i wish i could buy you out, said paul, thoughtfully.

can't you borrow the money?

how soon do you want to give up?

it's the seventeenth now. i should like to get rid of it by the
twenty-second.

i'll see what i can do. just keep it for me till to-morrow.

all right.

paul walked home revolving in his mind this unexpected opportunity. he
had made, as george barry's agent, a dollar a day, though he received
only half the profits. if he were himself the proprietor, and did
equally well, he could make twelve dollars a week. the calculation
almost took away his breath. twelve dollars a week would make about
fifty dollars a month. it would enable him to contribute more to the
support of the family, and save up money besides. but the great problem
was, how to raise the necessary money. if paul had been a railroad
corporation, he might have issued first mortgage bonds at a high rate
of interest, payable in gold, and negotiated them through some leading
banker. but he was not much versed in financial schemes, and therefore
was at a loss. the only wealthy friend he had was mr. preston, and he
did not like to apply to him till he had exhausted other ways and means.

what makes you so sober, paul? asked his mother, as he entered the
room. you are home early.

yes, i sold all my papers, and thought i would take an early dinner, so
as to be on hand in time for the first afternoon papers.

don't you feel well?

tiptop; but i've had a good offer, and i'm thinking whether i can
accept it.

what sort of an offer?

george barry wants to sell out his stand.

how much does he ask?

thirty-five dollars.

is it worth that?

yes, it's worth all that, and more, too. if i had it i could make two
dollars a day. but i haven't got thirty-five dollars.

i can let you have nine, paul. i had a little saved up, and i haven't
touched the money mr. preston paid me for the shirts.

i've got five myself, but that will only make fourteen.

won't he wait for the rest?

no, he's going to philadelphia early next week, and wants the whole in
cash.

it would be a pity to lose such a good chance, said mrs. hoffman.

that's what i think.

you could soon save up the money on two dollars a day.

i could pay for it in a month--i mean, all above the fourteen dollars
we have.

in a day or two i shall have finished the second half-dozen shirts, and
then i suppose mr. preston will pay me nine dollars more. i could let
you have six dollars of that.

that would make twenty. perhaps george barry will take that. if he
won't i don't know but i will venture to apply to mr. preston.

he seems to take an interest in you. perhaps he would trust you with
the money.

i could offer him a mortgage on the stock, said paul.

if he has occasion to foreclose, he will be well provided with
neckties, said mrs. hoffman, smiling.

none of which he could wear. i'll tell you what, mother, i should
like to pick up a pocketbook in the street, containing, say, twenty or
twenty-five dollars.

that would be very convenient, said his mother; but i think it will
hardly do to depend on such good luck happening to you. by the way, she
said, suddenly, perhaps i can help you, after all. don't you remember
that gold ring i picked up in central park two years ago?

the one you advertised?

yes. i advertised, or, rather, your father did; but we never found an
owner for it.

i remember it now, mother. have you got the ring still?

i will get it.

mrs. hoffman went to her trunk, and, opening it, produced the ring
referred to. it was a gold ring with a single stone of considerable
size.

i don't know how much it is worth, said mrs. hoffman; but if the
ring is a diamond, as i think it is, it must be worth as much as twenty
dollars.

did you ever price it?

no, paul; i have kept it, thinking that it would be something to fall
back upon if we should ever be hard pressed. as long as we were able to
get along without suffering, i thought i would keep it. besides, i had
another feeling. it might belong to some person who prized it very much,
and the time might come when we could find the owner. however, that is
not likely after so long a time. so, if you cannot raise the money in
any other way, you may sell the ring.

i might pawn it for thirty days, mother. by that time i should be able
to redeem it with the profits of my business.

i don't think you could get enough from a pawn-broker.

i can try, at any rate; but first i will see george barry, and find out
whether he will take twenty dollars down, and the rest at the end of a
month.

paul wrapped up the ring in a piece of paper, and deposited it in his
vest pocket. he waited till after dinner, and then went at once to the
necktie stand, where he made the proposal to george barry.

the young man shook his head.

i'd like to oblige you, paul, he said, but i must have the money.
i have an offer of thirty-two dollars, cash, from another party, and i
must take up with it if i can't do any better. i'd rather sell out to
you, but you know i have to consult my own interest.

of course, george, i can't complain of that.

i think you will be able to borrow the money somewhere.

most of my friends are as poor as myself, said paul. still, i think i
shall be able to raise the money. only wait for me two days.

yes, paul, i'll wait that long. i'd like to sell out to you, if only
because you have helped me when i was sick. but for you all that would
have been lost time.

where there's a will there's a way, george, said paul. i'm bound to
buy your stand and i will raise the money somehow.

paul bought a few papers, for he did not like to lose the afternoon
trade, and in an hour had sold them all off, realizing a profit of
twenty cents. this made his profits for the day seventy cents.

that isn't as well as i used to do, said paul to himself, but perhaps
i can make something more by and by. i will go now and see what i can
get for the ring.

as he had determined, he proceeded to a pawnbroker's shop which he had
often passed. it was on chatham street, and was kept by an old man, an
englishman by birth, who, though he lived meanly in a room behind his
shop, was popularly supposed to have accumulated a considerable fortune.



chapter xv

the pawnbroker's shop

stuffed behind the counter, and on the shelves of the pawnbroker's shop,
were articles in almost endless variety. all was fish that came to his
net. he was willing to advance on anything that had a marketable value,
and which promised to yield him, i was about to say, a fair profit.
but a fair profit was far from satisfying the old man. he demanded an
extortionate profit from those whom ill-fortune drove to his door for
relief.

eliakim henderson, for that was his name, was a small man, with a bald
head, scattering yellow whiskers, and foxlike eyes. spiderlike he waited
for the flies who flew of their own accord into his clutches, and took
care not to let them go until he had levied a large tribute. when paul
entered the shop, there were three customers ahead of him. one was
a young woman, whose pale face and sunken cheeks showed that she
was waging an unequal conflict with disease. she was a seamstress by
occupation, and had to work fifteen hours a day to earn the little that
was barely sufficient to keep body and soul together. confined in her
close little room on the fourth floor, she scarcely dared to snatch time
to look out of the window into the street beneath, lest she should
not be able to complete her allotted task. a two days' sickness had
compelled her to have recourse to eliakim henderson. she had under her
arm a small bundle covered with an old copy of the sun.

what have you got there? asked the old man, roughly. show it quick,
for there's others waiting.

meekly she unfolded a small shawl, somewhat faded from long use.

what will you give me on that? she asked, timidly.

it isn't worth much.

it cost five dollars.

then you got cheated. it never was worth half the money. what do you
want on it?

the seamstress intended to ask a dollar and a half, but after this
depreciation she did not venture to name so high a figure.

a dollar and a quarter, she said.

a dollar and a quarter! repeated the old man, shrilly. take it home
with you. i don't want it.

what will you give? asked the poor girl, faintly.

fifty cents. not a penny more.

fifty cents! she repeated, in dismay, and was about to refold it. but
the thought of her rent in arrears changed her half-formed intention.

i'll take it, sir.

the money and ticket were handed her, and she went back to her miserable
attic-room, coughing as she went.

now, ma'am, said eliakim.

his new customer was an irish woman, by no means consumptive in
appearance, red of face and portly of figure.

and what'll ye be givin' me for this? she asked, displaying a pair of
pantaloons.

are they yours, ma'am? asked eliakim, with a chuckle.

it's not bridget mccarty that wears the breeches, said that lady.
it's me husband's, and a dacent, respectable man he is, barrin' the
drink, which turns his head. what'll ye give for 'em?

name your price, said eliakim, whose principle it was to insist upon
his customers making the first offer.

twelve shillin's, said bridget.

twelve shillings! exclaimed eliakim, holding up both hands. that's
all they cost when they were new.

they cost every cint of five dollars, said bridget. they was made at
one of the most fashionable shops in the city. oh, they was an illigant
pair when they was new.

how many years ago was that? asked the pawnbroker.

only six months, and they ain't been worn more'n a month.

i'll give you fifty cents.

fifty cints! repeated mrs. mccarty, turning to the other customers,
as if to call their attention to an offer so out of proportion to the
valuable article she held in her hand. only fifty cints for these
illigant breeches! oh, it's you that's a hard man, that lives on the
poor and the nady.

you needn't take it. i should lose money on it, if you didn't redeem
it.

he says he'd lose money on it, said mrs. mccarty. and suppose he did,
isn't he a-rollin' in gold?

i'm poor, said eliakim; almost as poor as you, because i'm too
liberal to my customers.

hear till him! said mrs. mccarty. he says he's liberal and only
offers fifty cints for these illigant breeches.

will you take them or leave them? demanded the pawnbroker,
impatiently.

you may give me the money, said bridget; and it's i that wonder how
you can slape in your bed, when you are so hard on poor folks.

mrs. mccarty departed with her money, and eliakim fixed his sharp eyes
on the next customer. it was a tall man, shabbily dressed, with a thin,
melancholy-looking face, and the expression of one who had struggled
with the world, and failed in the struggle.

how much for this? he asked, pointing to the violin, and speaking in a
slow, deliberate tone, as if he did not feel at home in the language.

what do you want for it?

ten dollar, he answered.

ten dollars! you're crazy! was the contemptuous comment of the
pawnbroker.

he is a very good violin, said the man. if you would like to hear
him, and he made a movement as if to play upon it.

never mind! said eliakim. i haven't any time to hear it. if it were
new it would be worth something; but it's old, and----

but you do not understand, interrupted the customer, eagerly. it is
worth much more than new. do you see, it is by a famous maker? i would
not sell him, but i am poor, and my bettina needs bread. it hurts me
very much to let him go. i will buy him back as soon as i can.

i will give you two dollars, but i shall lose on it, unless you redeem
it.

two dollar! repeated the italian. ocielo! it is nothing. but bettina
is at home without bread, poor little one! will you not give three
dollar?

not a cent more.

i will take it.

there's your money and ticket.

and with these the poor italian departed, giving one last lingering
glance at his precious violin, as eliakim took it roughly and deposited
it upon a shelf behind him. but he thought of his little daughter at
home, and the means of relief which he held in his hand, and a smile
of joy lightened his melancholy features. the future might be dark and
unpromising, but for three days, at any rate, she should not want bread.

paul's turn came next.

what have you got? asked the pawnbroker.

paul showed the ring.

eliakim took it, and his small, beadlike eyes sparkled avariciously as
he recognized the diamond, for his experience was such that he
could form a tolerably correct estimate of its value. but he
quickly suppressed all outward manifestations of interest, and said,
indifferently, what do you want for it?

i want twenty dollars, said paul, boldly.

twenty dollars! returned the pawnbroker. that's a joke.

no, it isn't, said paul. i want twenty dollars, and you can't have
the ring for less.

if you said twenty shillings, i might give it to you, said eliakim;
but you must think i am a fool to give twenty dollars.

that's cheap for a diamond ring, said paul. it's worth a good deal
more.

the pawnbroker eyed paul sharply. did the boy know that it was a diamond
ring? what chance was there of deceiving him as to its value? the old
man, whose business made him a good judge, decided that the ring was not
worth less than two hundred and fifty dollars, and if he could get it
into his possession for a trifle, it would be a paying operation.

you're mistaken, boy, he said. it's not a diamond.

what is it?

a very good imitation.

how much is it worth?

i'll give you three dollars.

that won't do. i want to raise twenty dollars, and if i can't get that,
i'll keep the ring.

the pawnbroker saw that he had made a mistake. paul was not as much
in need of money as the majority of his customers. he would rather pay
twenty dollars than lose the bargain, though it went against the grain
to pay so much money. but after pronouncing the stone an imitation, how
could he rise much above the offer he had already made? he resolved to
approach it gradually. surveying it more closely, he said:

it is an excellent imitation. i will give you five dollars.

paul was not without natural shrewdness, and this sudden advance
convinced him that it was, after all, a real stone. he determined to get
twenty dollars or carry the ring home.

five dollars won't do me any good, he said. give me back the ring.

five dollars is a good deal of money, said eliakim.

i'd rather have the ring.

what is your lowest price?

twenty dollars.

i'll give you eight.

just now you said it was worth only three, said paul, sharply.

it is very fine gold. it is better than i thought. here is the money.

you're a little too fast, said paul, coolly. i haven't agreed to part
with the ring for eight dollars, and i don't mean to. twenty dollars is
my lowest price.

i'll give you ten, said the old man, whose eagerness increased with
paul's indifference.

no, you won't. give me back the ring.

i might give eleven, but i should lose money.

i don't want you to lose money, and i've concluded to keep the ring,
 said paul, rightly inferring from the old man's eagerness that the ring
was much more valuable than he had at first supposed.

but the old pawnbroker was fascinated by the sparkling bauble. he
could not make up his mind to give it up. by fair means or foul he must
possess it. he advanced his bid to twelve, fourteen, fifteen dollars,
but paul shook his head resolutely. he had made up his mind to carry
it to ball & black's, or some other first-class jewelers, and ascertain
whether it was a real diamond or not, and if so to obtain an estimate of
its value.

i've changed my mind, he said. i'll keep the ring. just give it back
to me.



chapter xvi

the jeweler's price

but to give it back was not eliakim's intention. should he buy it at
twenty dollars, he would make at least two hundred, and such bargains
were not to be had every day. he decided to give paul his price.

i will give you twenty dollars, he said; but it is more than the ring
is worth.

i have concluded not to take twenty dollars, said paul. you may give
it back.

you agreed to take twenty dollars, said eliakim, angrily.

that was when i first came in. you said you wouldn't give it.

i have changed my mind.

so have i, said paul. you had a chance to get it, but now it's too
late.

eliakim was deeply disappointed. generally he had his own way with his
customers, who, being in urgent need of money, were obliged to accept
such terms as he chose to offer. but now the tables were turned,
and paul proved more than a match for him. he resolved to attempt
intimidation.

boy, where did you get this ring? he asked, in a significant tone.

honestly, said paul. that's all you need to know.

i don't believe it, said the old man, harshly. i believe you stole
it.

you may believe what you like, but you must give it back to me, said
paul, coolly.

i've a great mind to call a policeman, said eliakim.

if you did, said paul, i'd tell him that you were anxious to get
the ring, though you believed it to be stolen. perhaps he might have
something to say to you.

eliakim perceived the force of paul's argument, for in law the receiver
of stolen goods is as bad as the thief, and there had been occasions
when the pawnbroker had narrowly escaped punishment for thus indirectly
conniving at theft.

if you say you got it honestly, i'll buy it of you, he said, changing
his tune. what will you take?

i don't care about selling to-day, answered paul.

i'll give you twenty-five dollars.

i can't sell without consulting my mother. it belongs to her.

reluctantly eliakim gave back the ring, finding his wiles of no effect.

bring your mother round to-morrow, he said. i'll give you a better
price than you will get anywhere else.

all right, said paul. i'll tell her what you say.

the old pawnbroker followed paul with wistful glances, vainly wishing
that he had not at first depreciated the ring to such an extent, that
his subsequent advances had evidently excited his customer's suspicion
that it was more valuable than he supposed. he felt that he had lost it
through not understanding the character of the boy with whom he had to
deal.

well, paul, what news of the ring? asked mrs. hoffman, as he
re-entered the room.

i was offered twenty-five dollars for it, said paul.

did you sell it?

no, mother.

why not? asked jimmy. twenty-five dollars is a lot of money.

i know it, said paul; but the ring is worth a great deal more.

what makes you think so, paul?

because the offer was made by a pawnbroker, who never pays quarter what
an article is worth. i am sure the ring is worth a hundred dollars.

yes, i am sure it is worth all that.

a hundred dollars! repeated jimmy, awestruck at the magnitude of the
sum.

what shall we do about it, paul? asked his mother. a hundred dollars
will do us more good than the ring.

i know that, mother. what i propose is, to carry it to ball & black's,
or tiffany's, and sell it for whatever they say it is worth. they are
first-class houses, and we can depend upon fair treatment.

your advice is good, paul. i think we will follow it. when will you
go?

i will go at once. i have nothing else to do, and i would like to find
out as soon as i can how much it will bring. old henderson wanted me
to think, at first, that it was only imitation, and offered me twenty
shillings on it. he's an old cheat. when he found that i wasn't to be
humbugged, he raised his offer by degrees to twenty-five dollars. that
was what made me suspect its value.

if you get a hundred dollars, paul, said jimmy, you can buy out the
stand.

that depends on whether mother will lend me the money, said paul. you
know it's hers. she may not be willing to lend without security.

i am so unaccustomed to being a capitalist, said mrs. hoffman,
smiling, that i shan't know how to sustain the character. i don't think
i shall be afraid to trust you, paul.

once more, with the ring carefully wrapped in a paper and deposited in
his pocketbook, paul started uptown. tiffany, whose fame as a jeweler
is world-wide, was located on broadway. he had not yet removed to his
present magnificent store on union square.

paul knew the store, but had never entered it. now, as he entered, he
was struck with astonishment at the sight of the immense and costly
stock, unrivaled by any similar establishment, not only in the united
states, but in europe. our hero walked up to the counter, and stood
beside a richly-dressed lady who was bargaining for a costly bracelet.
he had to wait ten minutes while the lady was making her choice from a
number submitted to her for inspection. finally she selected one, and
paid for it. the clerk, now being at leisure, turned to our hero and
asked:--

well, young man, what can i do for you?

i have a ring which i should like to show you. i want to know how much
it is worth.

very well. let me see it.

when paul produced the diamond ring, the clerk, who had long been in the
business, and perceived its value at once, started in surprise.

this is a very valuable ring, he said.

so i thought, said paul. how much is it worth?

do you mean how much should we ask for it?

no; how much would you give for it?

probably two hundred and fifty dollars. paul was quite startled on
finding the ring so much more valuable than he had supposed. he had
thought it might possibly be worth a hundred dollars; but he had not
imagined any rings were worth as much as the sum named.

will you buy it of me? he asked.

the clerk regarded paul attentively, and, as he thought, a little
suspiciously.

does the ring belong to you? he asked.

no, to my mother.

where did she buy it?

she didn't buy it at all. she found it one day at central park. it
belongs to her now. she advertised for an owner, and examined the papers
to see if it was advertised as lost, but could hear nothing of the one
to whom it belonged.

how long ago was this?

two years ago.

i will show this ring to mr. tiffany, said the clerk.

very well.

paul took a seat and waited.

soon mr. tiffany came up.

are you the boy who brought in the ring? he asked.

yes, sir.

you say your mother found it two years ago in central park?

yes, sir.

it is a valuable ring. i should be willing to buy it for two hundred
and fifty dollars, if i were quite certain that you had a right to
dispose of it.

i have told you the truth, mr. tiffany, said paul, a little nettled at
having his word doubted.

that may be, but there is still a possibility that the original owner
may turn up.

won't you buy it, then? asked paul, disappointed, for, if he were
unable to dispose of the ring, he would have to look elsewhere for the
means of buying out barry's street stand.

i don't say that; but i should want a guaranty of indemnity against
loss, in case the person who lost it should present a claim.

in that case, said paul, i would give you back the money you paid
me.

mr. tiffany smiled.

but suppose the money were all spent, he suggested. i suppose you are
intending to use the money?

i am going to start in business with it, said paul, and i hope to add
to it.

every one thinks so who goes into business; but some get disappointed.
you see, my young friend, that i should incur a risk. remember, i
don't know you. i judge from your appearance that you are honest; but
appearances are sometimes deceitful.

then i suppose you won't buy it? said paul, who saw the force of this
remark.

if you can bring here any responsible gentleman who knows you, and is
willing to guarantee me against loss in the event of the owner's being
found i will buy the ring for two hundred and fifty dollars.

paul brightened up. he thought at once of mr. preston, and, from the
friendly interest which that gentleman appeared to take in him, he
judged that he would not refuse him this service.

i think i can do that, he said. do you know mr. andrew preston? he is
a wealthy gentleman, who lives on madison avenue, between thirty-fourth
and thirty-fifth streets.

not personally. i know him by reputation.

will he be satisfactory?

entirely so.

he knows me well, said paul. i think he will be willing to stand
security for me. i will come back in a day or two.

paul took the ring, and left the store. he determined to call that
evening on mr. preston, and ask the favor indicated.



chapter xvii

mr. felix montgomery

paul had an errand farther uptown, and, on leaving tiffany's walked up
as far as twenty-third street. feeling rather tired, he got on board a
university place car to return. they had accomplished, perhaps, half the
distance, when, to his surprise, george barry entered the car.

how do you happen to be here, at this time, barry? he asked. i
thought you were attending to business.

i closed up for a couple of hours, having an errand at home. where have
you been?

to tiffany's.

what, the jewelers?

yes.

to buy a diamond ring, i suppose, said barry, jocosely.

no--not to buy, but to sell one.

you are joking, said his companion, incredulously.

no, i am not. the ring belongs to my mother. i am trying to raise money
enough on it to buy you out.

i didn't know your mother was rich enough to indulge in such expensive
jewelry.

she isn't, and that's the reason i am trying to sell it.

i mean, i didn't think she was ever rich enough.

i'll explain it, said paul. the ring was found some time since in
central park. as no owner has ever appeared, though we advertised it, we
consider that it belongs to us.

how much is it worth?

mr. tiffany offered two hundred and fifty dollars for it.

barry uttered an exclamation of surprise.

well, that is what i call luck. of course, you accepted it.

i intend to do so; but i must bring some gentleman who will guarantee
that i am all right and have the right to sell it.

can you do that?

i think so! i am going to ask mr. preston. i think he will do me that
favor.

then there's a fair chance of your buying me out.

yes. i guess i can settle the whole thing up to-morrow.

have you got the ring with you?

yes.

i should like to see it, if you have no objection.

paul drew it from his pocket, and passed it over to barry.

it's a handsome one, but who would think such a little thing could be
worth two hundred and fifty dollars?

i'd rather have the money than the ring.

so would i.

on the right of paul sat a man of about forty, well-dressed and
respectable in appearance, with a heavy gold chain ostentatiously
depending from his watch pocket, and with the air of a substantial
citizen. he listened to the conversation between barry and paul with
evident interest, and when barry had returned the ring, he said:

young gentleman, would you be kind enough to let me look at your
ring? i am myself in business as a jeweler in syracuse, and so feel an
interest in examining it.

certainly, sir, said paul, the stranger's explanation of his motives
inspiring him with perfect confidence.

the jeweler from syracuse took the ring in his hands and appeared to
examine it carefully.

this is a handsome ring, he said, and one of great value. how much
were you offered for it at tiffany's?

two hundred and fifty dollars.

it is worth more.

yes, i suppose so, said paul; but he has to sell it, and make a
profit.

he could do that, and yet make a profit. i will pay you two hundred and
seventy-five dollars, myself--that is, on one condition.

i don't object to getting twenty-five dollars more, said paul. what
is the condition?

i have an order from a gentleman for a diamond ring for a young
lady--an engagement ring, in short. if this suits him, as i think it
will, i will pay you what i said. i can easily get three hundred and
twenty-five from him.

how are you going to find out whether it will suit him?

easily. he is stopping at the same hotel with me.

what hotel is that?

lovejoy's. if you can spare the time and will come with me now, we
can arrange matters at once. by the way, you can refer me to some
responsible citizen, who will guarantee you. not, of course, that i have
any doubts, but we business men are forced to be cautious.

paul mentioned mr. preston's name.

quite satisfactory, answered the jeweler. i know mr. preston
personally, and as i am pressed for time, i will accept his name without
calling upon him. what is your name?

paul hoffman.

i will note it down.

the gentleman from syracuse drew out a memorandum book, in which he
entered paul's name.

when you see mr. preston, just mention my name; felix montgomery.

i will do so.

say, if you please, that i would have called upon him, but, coming to
the city strictly on business, was too hurried to do so.

this also paul promised, and counted himself fortunate in falling in
with a friend, or, at all events, acquaintance of mr. preston, since he
was likely to make twenty-five dollars more than he would otherwise have
done.

when he got out of the car at the astor house, the stranger said:

it will be half an hour before i can reach lovejoy's, as i have a
business call to make first. can you call there, say, in three-quarters
of an hour?

yes, sir.

very well, then, i will expect you. inquire for me at the desk, and ask
the servant to conduct you to my room--you remember my name?

yes, sir--mr. felix montgomery.

quite right. good-by, then, till we meet.

mr. felix montgomery went into the astor house, and remained about five
minutes. he then came out on the steps, and, looking about him to see
if paul was anywhere near, descended the steps, and walked across to
lovejoy's hotel. going up to the desk, he inquired:

can you accommodate me with a room?

yes, sir; please enter your name.

the stranger entered his name with a flourish, as felix montgomery,
syracuse.

room no. 237, said the clerk; will you go up now?

yes, i think so.

any luggage?

my trunk will be brought from the st. nicholas in the course of the
afternoon.

we require payment in advance where there is no luggage.

very well. i will pay for one day. i am not sure but i shall get
through my business in time to go away to-morrow.

here the servant appeared to conduct mr. montgomery to his room.

by the way, he said, turning back, as if it were an afterthought, i
directed a boy to call here for me in about half an hour. when he comes
you may send him up to my room.

very well, sir.

mr. montgomery followed the servant upstairs to room no. 237. it was
rather high up, but he seemed well pleased that this was the case.

hope you won't get tired of climbing, sir, said the servant.

no--i've got pretty good wind.

most gentlemen complain of going up so far.

it makes little difference to me.

at length they reached the room, and mr. montgomery entered.

this will answer very well, he said, with a hasty glance about him.
when my trunk comes, i want it sent up.

yes, sir.

i believe that is all; you can go.

the servant retired and mr. felix montgomery sat down upon the bed.

my little plot seems likely to succeed, he said to himself. i've been
out of luck lately, but this boy's ring will give me a lift. he can't
suspect anything. he'll be sure to come.

probably the reader has already suspected that mr. felix montgomery
was not a jeweler from syracuse, nor had he any claim to the name under
which he at present figured. he was a noted confidence man, who lived by
preying upon the community. his appearance was in his favor, and it was
his practice to assume the dress and air of a respectable middle-aged
citizen, as in the present instance. the sight of the diamond ring had
excited his cupidity, and he had instantly formed the design of getting
possession of it, if possible. thus far, his plan promised success.

meanwhile, paul loitered away the time in the city hall park for half
an hour or more. he did not care to go home until his negotiation was
complete, and he could report the ring sold, and carry home the money.

won't mother be astonished, he thought, at the price i got for the
ring? i'm in luck this morning.

when the stipulated time had passed, paul rose from the bench on which
he was seated, and walked to lovejoy's hotel, not far distant.

has mr. felix montgomery a room here? he asked.

yes, answered the clerk. did you wish to see him?

yes, sir.

he mentioned that a boy would call by appointment. here, james, show
this boy up to no. 237--mr. montgomery's room.

a hotel servant appeared, and paul followed him up several flights of
stairs till they stood before no. 237.

this is the room, sir, said james. wait a minute, and i'll knock.

in answer to the knock, mr. montgomery himself opened the door.

come in, he said to paul; i was expecting you.

so paul, not suspecting treachery, entered no. 237.



chapter xviii

a clever thief

take a seat, said mr. montgomery. my friend will be in directly.
meanwhile will you let me look at the ring once more?

paul took it from his pocket, and handed it to the jeweler from
syracuse, as he supposed him to be.

mr. montgomery took it to the window, and appeared to be examining it
carefully.

he stood with his back to paul, but this did not excite suspicion on the
part of our hero.

i am quite sure, he said, still standing with his back to paul, that
this will please my friend. from the instructions he gave me, it is
precisely what he wanted.

while uttering these words, he had drawn a sponge and a vial of
chloroform from his side pocket. he saturated the former from the vial,
and then, turning quickly, seized paul, too much taken by surprise to
make immediate resistance, and applied the sponge to his nose. when he
realized that foul play was meditated, he began to struggle, but he
was in a firm grasp, and the chloroform was already beginning to do
its work. his head began to swim, and he was speedily in a state of
insensibility. when this was accomplished, mr. felix montgomery, eyeing
the insensible boy with satisfaction, put on his hat, walked quickly
to the door, which he locked on the outside, and made his way rapidly
downstairs. leaving the key at the desk, he left the hotel and
disappeared.

meanwhile paul slowly recovered consciousness. as he came to himself,
he looked about him bewildered, not at first comprehending where he was.
all at once it flashed upon him, and he jumped up eagerly and rushed to
the door. he tried in vain to open it.

i am regularly trapped! he thought, with a feeling of mingled anger
and vexation. what a fool i was to let myself be swindled so easily! i
wonder how long i have been lying here insensible?

paul was not a boy to give up easily. he meant to get back the ring if
it was a possible thing. the first thing was, of course, to get out of
his present confinement. he was not used to hotel arrangements and never
thought of the bell, but, as the only thing he could think of, began to
pound upon the door. but it so happened that at this time there were no
servants on that floor, and his appeals for help were not heard. every
moment that he had to wait seemed at least five, for no doubt the man
who had swindled him was improving the time to escape to a place of
safety. finding that his blows upon the door produced no effect, he
began to jump up and down upon the floor, making, in his heavy boots, a
considerable noise.

the room directly under no. 237 was occupied by an old gentleman of a
very nervous and irascible temper, mr. samuel piper, a country merchant,
who, having occasion to be in the city on business for a few days, had
put up at lovejoy's hotel. he had fatigued himself by some business
calls, and was now taking a little rest upon the bed, when he was
aroused from half-sleep by the pounding overhead.

i wish people would have the decency to keep quiet, he said to
himself, peevishly. how can i rest with such a confounded racket going
on above!

he lay back, thinking the noise would cease, but paul, finding the
knocking on the door ineffectual, began to jump up and down, as i have
already said. of course this noise was heard distinctly in the room
below.

this is getting intolerable! exclaimed mr. piper, becoming more and
more excited. the man ought to be indicted as a common nuisance.
how they can allow such goings-on in a respectable hotel, i can't
understand. i should think the fellow was splitting wood upstairs.

he took his cane, and, standing on the bed, struck it furiously against
the ceiling, intending it as signal to the man above to desist. but
paul, catching the response, began to jump more furiously than ever,
finding that he had attracted attention.

mr. piper became enraged.

the man must be a lunatic or overcome by drink, he exclaimed. i can't
and i won't stand it.

but the noise kept on.

mr. piper put on his shoes and his coat, and, seizing his cane, emerged
upon the landing. he espied a female servant just coming upstairs.

here, you bridget, or nancy, or whatever your name is, he roared,
there's a lunatic upstairs, making a tremendous row in the room over
mine. if you don't stop him i'll leave the hotel. hear him now!

bridget let fall her duster in fright.

is it a crazy man? she asked.

of course he must be. i want you to go up and stop him.

is it me that would go near a crazy man? exclaimed bridget,
horror-struck; i wouldn't do it for a million dollars; no, i wouldn't.

i insist upon your going up, said mr. piper, irritably. he must be
stopped. do you think i am going to stand such an infernal thumping over
my head?

i wouldn't do it if you'd go down on your knees to me, said bridget,
fervently.

come along, i'll go with you.

but the terrified girl would not budge.

then you go down and tell your master there's a madman up here. if you
don't, i will.

this bridget consented to do; and, going downstairs, gave a not very
coherent account of the disturbance. three male servants came back with
her.

is that the man? asked the first, pointing to mr. piper, who certainly
looked half wild with irritation.

yes, said bridget, stupidly.

immediately mr. piper found himself pinioned on either side by a stout
servant.

what have you been kickin' up a row for? demanded the first.

let me alone, or i'll have the law take care of you, screamed the
outraged man. can't you hear the fellow that's making the racket?

paul, tired with thumping, had desisted for a moment, but now had
recommenced with increased energy. the sounds could be distinctly heard
on the floor below.

excuse me, sir. i made a mistake, said the first speaker, releasing
his hold. we'll go up and see what's the matter.

so the party went upstairs, followed at a distance by bridget, who,
influenced alike by fear and curiosity, did not know whether to go up or
retreat.

the sounds were easily traced to room no. 237. in front of this,
therefore, the party congregated.

what's the matter in there? asked james, the first servant, putting
his lips to the keyhole.

yes, chimed in mr. piper, irritably; what do you mean by such an
infernal hubbub?

open the door, and let me out, returned paul, eagerly.

the party looked at each other in surprise. they did not expect to find
the desperate maniac a boy.

perhaps there's more than one of them, suggested the second servant,
prudently.

why don't you come out yourself? asked james. i am locked in.

the door was opened with a passkey and paul confronted the party.

now, young man, what do you mean by making such a disturbance?
 demanded mr. piper, excitably. my room is just below, and i expected
every minute you would come through.

i am sorry if i disturbed you, sir, said paul, politely; but it was
the only way i could attract attention.

how came you locked up here?

yes, chimed in james, suspiciously, how came you locked up here?

i was drugged with chloroform, and locked in, said paul.

who did it?

mr. felix montgomery; or that's what he called himself. i came here by
appointment to meet him.

what did he do that for?

he has carried off a diamond ring which i came up here to sell him.

a very improbable story, said mr. piper, suspiciously. what should
such a boy have to do with a diamond ring?

nothing is easier than to impart suspicion. men are prone to believe
evil of each other; and paul was destined to realize this. the hotel
servants, ignorant and suspicious, caught the suggestion.

it's likely he's a' thafe, said bridget, from a safe distance.

if i were, said paul, coolly, i shouldn't be apt to call your
attention by such a noise. i can prove to you that i am telling the
truth. i stopped at the office, and the bookkeeper sent a servant to
show me up here.

if this is true, said mr. piper, why, when you found yourself locked
in, didn't you ring the bell, instead of making such a confounded
racket? my nerves won't get over it for a week.

i didn't think of the bell, said paul; i am not much used to hotels.

what will we do with him? asked james, looking to mr. piper for
counsel.

you'd better take him downstairs, and see if his story is correct,
 said the nervous gentleman, with returning good sense.

i'll do it, said james, to whom the very obvious suggestion seemed
marked by extraordinary wisdom, and he grasped paul roughly by the arm.

you needn't hold me, said our hero, shaking off the grasp. i haven't
any intention of running away. i want to find out, if i can, what has
become of the man that swindled me.

james looked doubtfully at mr. piper.

i don't think he means to run away, said that gentleman. i begin to
think his story is correct. and hark you, my young friend, if you ever
get locked up in a hotel room again, just see if there is a bell before
you make such a confounded racket.

yes, sir, i will, said paul, half-smiling; but i'll take care not to
get locked up again. it won't be easy for anybody to play that trick on
me again.

the party filed downstairs to the office and paul told his story to the
bookkeeper.

have you seen mr. montgomery go out? asked our hero.

yes, he went out half an hour ago, or perhaps more. he left his key at
the desk, but said nothing. he seemed to be in a hurry.

you didn't notice in what direction he went?

no.

of course no attempt was made to detain paul. there could be no case
against him. he went out of the hotel, and looked up and down broadway
in a state of indecision. he did not mean to sit down passively and
submit to the swindle. but he had no idea in what direction to search
for mr. felix montgomery.



chapter xix

paul deliberates

paul stood in the street irresolute. he looked hopelessly up and down
broadway, but of course the jeweler from syracuse was not to be seen.
seeking for him in a city containing hundreds of streets and millions
of inhabitants was about as discouraging as hunting for a needle in a
haystack. but difficult as it was, paul was by no means ready to give
up the search. indeed, besides the regret he felt at the loss, he was
mortified at having been so easily outwitted.

he's taken me in just as if i was a country boy, thought paul. i dare
say he's laughing at me now. i'd like to get even with him.

finally he decided to go to tiffany's, and ask them to detain any one
who might bring in the ring and offer it for sale. he at once acted upon
this thought, and, hailing a broadway stage, for no time was to be lost,
soon reached his destination. entering the store, he walked up to the
counter and addressed the clerk to whom he had before shown the ring.

do you remember my offering you a diamond ring for sale this morning?
 he asked.

yes, i remember it very well. have you got it with you?

no, it has been stolen from me.

indeed! how was that? asked the clerk, with interest.

i met in the cars a well-dressed man, who called himself a jeweler from
syracuse. he examined the ring, and offered me more than mr. tiffany,
but asked me to bring it to him at lovejoy's hotel. when i got there, he
drugged me with chloroform, and when i recovered he was gone.

you have been unlucky. there are plenty of such swindlers about. you
should have been careful about displaying the ring before strangers.

i was showing it to a friend.

have you notified the police?

not yet. i came here to let you know, because i thought the thief might
bring it in here to sell.

very likely. give me a description of him.

paul described mr. felix montgomery to the best of his ability.

i think i should know him from your description. i will speak to mr.
tiffany, and he will no doubt give orders to detain any person who may
offer the ring for sale.

thank you.

if you will give me your address, we will notify you in case the ring
is brought in.

paul left his address, and went out of the store, feeling that he had
taken one step toward the recovery of his treasure. he next visited the
police headquarters, and left a detailed description of the man who had
relieved him of the ring and of the circumstances attending the robbery.
then he went home.

his mother looked up as he entered.

well, paul? she said, inquiringly.

i've got bad news, mother, he said.

what is it? tell me quick! she said, nervously.

the ring has been stolen from me.

how did it happen, paul?

first, i must tell you how much the ring is worth. i went up to
tiffany's, and showed the ring to mr. tiffany himself. he told me
that he would give me two hundred and fifty dollars for it, if i would
satisfy him that i had a right to sell it.

two hundred and fifty dollars! repeated mrs. hoffman, in amazement.

yes, the diamond is very large and pure.

two hundred and fifty dollars would be a great help to us.

yes, mother, that is what makes me feel so bad about being swindled out
of it.

tell me how it happened. is there no chance of recovering it?

a little. i shall do what i can. i have already notified the police,
and mr. tiffany.

you have not told me yet how you lost it.

when paul had told the story, his mother asked, did you mention it in
the cars that you had offered it at tiffany's?

yes, and i mentioned his offer.

perhaps the thief would be cautious about going there, for that very
reason. he might think the ring would be recognized.

he would go to a large place, thinking that so valuable a ring would be
more readily purchased there.

he might go to ball & black's.

that is true.

it would be well to give notice there also.

i will go up there at once. i only wish i could meet mr. felix
montgomery; i don't think he would find it so easy to outreach me a
second time.

take some dinner first, paul.

then i must hurry it down, mother; i don't want to run the risk
of getting too late to ball & black's. i can't help thinking what a
splendid thing it would be if we had the two hundred and fifty dollars.
i would buy out barry's stand, and i would get a sewing-machine for you,
and we could live much more comfortably. it makes me mad to think i let
that villain take me in so! he must think me jolly green.

anybody might have been deceived, paul. you mustn't blame yourself too
much for that.

leaving paul on his way to ball & black's, we return to mr. felix
montgomery, as we shall continue to call him, though he had no right to
the name. after stupefying paul, as already described, he made his way
downstairs, and, leaving his key at the desk, went out.

i hope my young friend will enjoy himself upstairs, he chuckled to
himself. he's quite welcome to the use of the room till to-morrow
morning. it's paid for in advance, and i don't think i shall find it
convenient to stop there.

he took the ring from his vest pocket and glanced at it furtively.

it's a beauty, he murmured, complacently. i never saw a handsomer
ring of the size. what was it the boy said he was offered for it? two
hundred and fifty dollars! that'll give me a lift, and it doesn't come
any too soon. my money is pretty low.

he walked across the city hall park, and at barclay street entered a
university place car.

evenin' paper, mister? said a ragged newsboy, whose garments were
constructed on the most approved system of ventilation.

what have you got?

evenin' post, mail, express!

give me an express. here's ten cents.

i haven't got but three cents change, mister.

never mind the change, said mr. montgomery, in a fit of temporary
generosity, occasioned by his good luck.

thank you, sir, said the newsboy, regarding mr. montgomery as a
philanthropist worthy of his veneration.

felix montgomery leaned back in his seat, and, with a benevolent smile,
ran his eyes over the columns of the express. among the paragraphs
which attracted his attention was one relating to a comrade, of similar
profession, who had just been arrested in albany while in the act of
relieving a gentleman of his pocketbook.

jerry always was a bungler, said mr. montgomery, complacently, to
himself. he can't hold a candle to me. i flatter myself that i know how
to manage a little affair, like this, for instance, as well as the next
man. it'll take a sharp detective to lay hold of me.

it might have been thought that the manner in which he had gained
possession of the ring would have troubled mr. montgomery, but it was
many years since he had led an honest life. he had made a living by
overreaching others, and his conscience had become so blunted as to
occasion him little trouble. he appeared to think that the world owed
him a living, and that he was quite justified in collecting the debt in
any way he could.

about twenty minutes brought the car to amity street and mr. montgomery
signaled the conductor, and, the car being stopped, he got out.

he walked a few rods in a westerly direction, and paused before a
three-story brick house, which appeared to have seen better days.

it was now used as a boarding, or rather lodging-house. the guests were
not of a very high character, the landlady not being particular as long
as her rent was paid regularly. mr. montgomery ascended the steps in
a jaunty way, and, opening the door with a passkey, ascended the front
staircase. he paused before a room on the third floor, and knocked in a
peculiar manner.

the door was opened by a tall woman, in rather neglected attire.

so you're back, she said.

yes, my dear, home again. as the poet says, 'there is no place like
home.'

i should hope there wasn't, said mrs. montgomery, looking about her
disdainfully. a very delightful home it makes with such a charming
prospect of the back yard. i've been moping here all day.

you've found something to console you, i see, said her husband,
glancing at the table, on which might be seen a bottle of brandy,
half-emptied, and a glass.

yes, said mrs. montgomery; i felt so bad i had to send out for
something. it took every cent i had. and, by the way, mrs. flagg sent in
her bill, this morning, for the last two weeks' board; she said she must
have it.

my dear, said mr. montgomery, she shall have it.

you don't mean to say you've got the money, tony! exclaimed his wife,
in surprise.

no, i haven't got the money; but i've got what's just as good.

what have you got?

what do you say to this? and mr. montgomery drew from his pocket the
diamond ring, whose loss was so deeply felt by our hero.

is that genuine? asked the lady.

it's the real thing.

what a beauty! where did you get it?

it was kindly presented me by a young man of the tender age of fifteen
or thereabouts, who had no further use for it.

you did him out of it, that is. tell me how you did it.

mr. montgomery told the story. his wife listened with interest and
appreciation.

that was a smart operation, tony, she said.

i should say it was, maria.

how much is the ring worth?

two hundred and fifty dollars.

can you get that for it?

i can get that for it.

tony, you are a treasure.

have you just found that out, my dear?



chapter xx

the thief in disguise

it will be inferred, from the preceding conversation, that mrs.
montgomery was not likely to be shocked by the lack of honesty in her
husband. her conscience was as elastic as his; and she was perfectly
willing to help him spend his unlawful gains.

how soon are you going to sell the ring? she asked.

i should like to dispose of it at once, maria.

you will need to. mrs. flagg wants her bill paid at once.

i quite understand the necessity of promptness, my dear. only, you
know, one has to be cautious about disposing of articles obtained in
this way.

you say you left the boy locked up. it seems to me, you'd better sell
the ring before he has a chance to get out and interfere.

i don't know but you're right, my dear. well, we'll get ready.

do you want me to go with you?

yes; it will disarm suspicion if you are with me. i think i'll go as a
country parson.

country parsons are not apt to have diamond rings to dispose of.

very true, my dear. the remark does credit to your good judgment and
penetration. but i know how to get over that.

as how?

be a little more particular about your speech, my dear. remember, you
are a minister's wife, and must use refined expressions. what is easier
than to say that the ring was given me by a benevolent lady of my
congregation, to dispose of for the benefit of the poor?

well thought of, tony. you've got a good head-piece.

you're right, my dear. i don't like to indulge in self-praise, but i
believe i know a thing or two. and now for the masquerade. where are the
duds?

in the black trunk.

then we'd better lose no time in putting them on.

without describing the process of transformation in detail, it will be
sufficient to say that the next twenty minutes wrought a decided change
in the appearance of mr. and mrs. felix montgomery. the former was
arrayed in a suit of canonical black, not of the latest cut. a white
neckcloth was substituted for the more gaudy article worn by the jeweler
from syracuse, and a pair of silver-bowed spectacles, composed of plain
glass, lent a scholarly air to his face. his hair was combed behind his
ears, and, so far as appearance went, he quite looked the character of a
clergyman from the rural districts.

how will i do, my dear? he asked, complacently.

tiptop, answered the lady. how do i look?

mrs. montgomery had put on a dress of sober tint, and scant
circumference, contrasting in a marked manner with the mode then
prevailing. a very plain collar encircled her neck. her hands were
incased in brown silk gloves, while her husband wore black kids.
her bonnet was exceedingly plain, and her whole costume was almost
quaker-like in its simplicity.

her husband surveyed her with satisfaction.

my dear, he said, you are a fitting helpmeet for the rev. mr. barnes,
of hayfield centre. by jove, you do me credit!

'by jove' is not a proper expression for a man of your profession, mr.
barnes, said the new minister's wife, with a smile.

you are right, my dear. i must eschew profanity, and cultivate a
decorous style of speech. well, are we ready?

i am.

then let us set forth on our pilgrimage. we will imagine, mrs. barnes,
that we are about to make some pastoral calls.

they emerged into the street. on the way downstairs they met mrs. flagg,
the landlady, who bowed respectfully. she was somewhat puzzled, however,
not knowing when they were let in.

good-morning, madam, said mr. barnes. are you the landlady of this
establishment?

yes, sir.

i have been calling on one of your lodgers--mr. anthony blodgett (this
was the name by which mr. felix montgomery was known in the house). he
is a very worthy man.

now, to tell the truth, mrs. flagg had not been particularly struck by
the moral worth of her lodger, and this testimony led her to entertain
doubts as to the discernment of her clerical visitor.

you know him, then?

i know him as myself, madam. have you never heard him mention the name
of rev. mr. barnes, of hayfield centre, connecticut?

i can't say i have, answered the landlady.

that is singular. we were always very intimate. we attended the same
school as boys, and, in fact, were like damon and pythias.

mrs. flagg had never heard of damon and pythias, still she understood
the comparison.

you're in rather a different line now, she remarked, dryly.

yes, our positions are different. my friend dwells in the busy
metropolis, while i pass a quiet, peaceful existence in a secluded
country village, doing what good i can. but, my dear, we are perhaps
detaining this worthy lady from her domestic avocations. i think we must
be going.

very well, i am ready.

the first sound of her voice drew the attention of the landlady. mrs.
felix montgomery possessed a thin somewhat shrill, voice, which she
was unable to conceal, and, looking attentively at her, mrs. flagg
penetrated her disguise. then, turning quickly to the gentleman, aided
by her new discovery, she also recognized him.

well, i declare, said she, if you didn't take me in beautifully.

mr. montgomery laughed heartily.

you wouldn't know me, then? he said.

you're got up excellent, said mrs. flagg, with a slight disregard for
grammar. is it a joke?

yes, a little practical joke. we're going to call on some friends and
see if they know us.

you'd do for the theatre, said the landlady, admiringly.

i flatter myself i might have done something on the stage, if my
attention had been turned that way. but, my dear, we must be moving, or
we shan't get through our calls.

i wonder what mischief they are up to now, thought mrs. flagg, as she
followed them to the door. i know better than to think they'd take the
trouble to dress up that way just to take in their friends. no, they're
up to some game. not that i care, as long as they get money enough to
pay my bill.

so the worldly-wise landlady dismissed them from her thoughts, and went
about her work.

mr. barnes and his wife walked up toward broadway at a slow, decorous
pace, suited to the character they had assumed. more than one who met
them turned back to look at what they considered a perfect type of
the country minister and his wife. they would have been not a little
surprised to learn that under this quiet garb walked two of the most
accomplished swindlers in a city abounding in adventurers of all kinds.

mr. barnes paused a moment to reprove a couple of urchins who were
pitching pennies on the sidewalk.

don't you know that it's wrong to pitch pennies? he said gravely.

none of your chaff, mister, retorted one of the street boys,
irreverently. when did you come from the country, old goggles?

my son, you should address me with more respect.

just get out of the way, mister! i don't want to hear no preachin'.

i am afraid you have been badly brought up, my son.

i ain't your son, and i wouldn't be for a shillin'. just you go along,
and let me alone!

a sad case of depravity, my dear, remarked mr. barnes to his wife. i
fear we must leave these boys to their evil ways.

you'd better, said one of the boys.

they're smart little rascals! said mr. montgomery, when they were out
of hearing of the boys. i took them in, though. they thought i was the
genuine article.

we'd better not waste any more time, said his wife. that boy might
get out, you know, and give us trouble.

i don't believe he will get out in a hurry. i locked the door and he'd
have to pound some time before he could make any one hear, i declare, i
should like to see how he looked when he recovered from his stupor, and
realized that his ring was gone.

what sort of boy was he, tony?

better not call me by that name, my dear. it might be heard, you know,
and might not be considered in character. as to your question, he was by
no means a stupid boy. rather sharpish, i should say.

then how came he to let you take him in?

as to that, i claim to be rather sharp myself, and quite a match even
for a smart boy. i haven't knocked about the world forty-four years for
nothing.

they were now in broadway. turning the corner of amity street, they
walked a short distance downtown, and paused before the handsome jewelry
store of ball & black.

i think we had better go in here, said felix montgomery--(i hesitate a
little by which of his numerous names to call him).

why not go to tiffany's?

i gather from what the boy told me that the ring has already been
offered there. it would be very likely to be recognized and that would
be awkward, you know.

are you sure the ring has not been offered here? asked his wife.

quite sure. the boy would have mentioned it, had such been the case.

very well. let us go in then.

the rev. mr. barnes and his wife, of hayfield centre; entered the
elegant store, and ten minutes later paul hoffman entered also, and took
his station at the counters wholly unconscious of the near proximity of
the man who had so artfully swindled him.



chapter xxi

paul is checkmated

on entering the large jewelry store mr. montgomery and his wife walked
to the rear of the store, and advanced to the counter, behind which
stood a clerk unengaged.

what shall i show you? he inquired

i didn't come to purchase, said mr. montgomery, with suavity, but to
sell. i suppose you purchase jewelry at times?

sometimes, said the clerk. let me see what you have.

first, said the adventurer, let me introduce myself. i am the rev.
mr. barnes, of hayfield centre, connecticut. you perhaps know the
place?

i don't think i remember it, said the clerk, respectfully.

it is a small place, said mr. montgomery, modestly, but my tastes are
plain and unobtrusive, and i do not aspire to a more conspicuous post.
however, that is not to the purpose. a lady parishioner, desiring to
donate a portion of her wealth to the poor, has placed in my hand a
diamond ring, the proceeds to be devoted to charitable objects. i desire
to sell it, and, knowing the high reputation of your firm feel safe in
offering it to you. i know very little of the value of such things,
since they are not in my line, but i am sure of fair treatment at your
hands.

you may depend upon that, said the clerk, favorably impressed with the
appearance and manners of his customer. allow me to see the ring.

the brilliant was handed over the counter.

it is quite valuable, said he, scrutinizing it closely.

so i supposed, as the lady is possessed of wealth. you may rely upon
its being genuine.

i am not authorized to purchase, said the clerk, but i will show it to
one of the firm.

just at that moment, mr. montgomery, chancing to look toward the door,
was startled by seeing the entrance of paul hoffman. he saw that it
would be dangerous to carry the negotiation any farther and he quickly
gave a secret signal to his wife.

the hint was instantly understood and acted upon.

mrs. montgomery uttered a slight cry, and clung to her husband's arm.

my dear, she said, i feel one of my attacks coming on. take me out
quickly.

my wife is suddenly taken sick, said mr. montgomery, hurriedly.

she is subject to fits. if you will give me the ring, i will return
to-morrow and negotiate for its sale.

i am very sorry, said the clerk, with sympathy, handing back the ring.
can i get anything for the lady?

no, thank you. the best thing to do is to get her into the open air.
thank you for your kindness.

let me help you, said the clerk, and coming from behind the counter he
took one arm of mrs. montgomery, who, leaning heavily on her husband and
the clerk, walked, or rather was carried, to the street door.

of course, the attention of all within the store was drawn to the party.

what was the matter? inquired a fellow-clerk, as the salesman
returned.

it was a clergyman from connecticut, who wished to sell a diamond ring,
given to him for charitable purposes. his wife was taken suddenly sick.
he will bring it back to-morrow.

was the ring a valuable one?

it must be worth in the neighborhood of three hundred dollars.

paul listened to this explanation, and a sudden light flashed upon him,
as he heard the estimated value of the ring. there had been something
familiar in the appearance of the adventurer, though, on account of
his successful disguise and his being accompanied by a lady, he had
not before felt any suspicion as to his identity with the man who had
swindled him. now he felt convinced that it was mr. felix montgomery,
and that it was his own appearance which had led to the sudden sickness
and the precipitate departure.

that trick won't work, mr. montgomery, he said to himself. i've got
on your track sooner than i anticipated, and i mean to follow you up.

reaching the sidewalk, he caught sight of mr. and mrs. montgomery just
turning the corner of a side street. the pair supposed they were safe,
not thinking that our hero had recognized them, and the lady no longer
exhibited illness, and was walking briskly at her husband's side. paul
hurried up and tapped the adventurer on the shoulder. mr. montgomery,
turning, was annoyed on finding that he had not yet escaped. he
determined, however, to stick to his false character, and deny all
knowledge of the morning's transaction.

well, my young friend, he said, do you want me? i believe i have not
the pleasure of your acquaintance.

you are mistaken there, mr. felix montgomery, said paul,
significantly.

by what name did you address me? said the swindler, assuming a tone of
surprise.

i addressed you as mr. felix montgomery.

you have made a mistake, my good friend. i am an humble clergyman from
connecticut. i am called the rev. mr. barnes. should you ever visit
hayfield centre, i shall be glad to receive a call from you.

when i last met you, you were a jeweler from syracuse, said paul,
bluntly.

mr. montgomery laughed heartily.

my dear, he said, turning to his wife, is not this an excellent
joke? my young friend here thinks he recognizes in me a jeweler from
syracuse.

indeed, you are quite mistaken, said the lady. my husband is a
country minister. we came up to the city this morning on a little
business.

i understand on what business, said paul. you wanted to dispose of a
diamond ring.

mr. montgomery was disposed to deny the charge, but a moment's
reflection convinced him that it would be useless, as paul had doubtless
been informed in ball & black's of his business there. he decided to put
on a bold front and admit it.

i suppose you were in ball & black's just now, he said.

i was.

and so learned my business there? but i am at a loss to understand why
you should be interested in the matter.

that ring is mine, said paul. you swindled me out of it this
morning.

my young friend, you must certainly be insane, said mr. montgomery,
shrugging his shoulders. my dear, did you hear that?

he is an impudent boy, said the lady. i am surprised that you should
be willing to talk to him.

if you leave here i will put a policeman on your track, said paul.

he looked so determined that mr. montgomery found that he must parley.

you are under a strange hallucination, my young friend, he said.
if you will walk along with me, i think i can convince you of your
mistake.

there is no mistake about the matter, said paul, walking on with them.
the ring is mine, and i must have it.

my dear, will you explain about the ring? he may credit your
testimony.

i don't see that any explanation is necessary, said the lady.
however, since you wish it, i will say that the ring was handed you by
mrs. benton, a wealthy lady of your parish, with instructions to sell
it, and devote the proceeds to charitable purposes.

is that explanation satisfactory? asked mr. montgomery.

no, it is not, said paul, resolutely. i don't believe one word of
it. i recognize you in spite of your dress. you gave me chloroform this
morning in a room in lovejoy's hotel, and when i was unconscious you
made off with the ring which i expected to sell you. you had better
return it, or i will call a policeman.

i am not the person you take me for, said felix montgomery.

you are the jeweler from syracuse who swindled me out of my ring.

i never was a jeweler, and never lived in syracuse, said the
adventurer, with entire truth.

you may be right, but that is what you told me this morning.

i wish you would go away, and cease to annoy us, said the lady,
impatiently.

i want my ring.

we have no ring of yours.

show me the ring, and if it is not mine i will go away.

you are a very impudent fellow, upon my word, said mrs. montgomery,
sharply, to accuse a gentleman like my husband of taking your ring. i
don't believe you ever had one.

my dear, interposed her husband, mildly, i dare say my young friend
here really thinks we have his ring. of course it is a great mistake.
imagine what our friends in hayfield centre would think of such a
charge! but you must remember that he is unacquainted with my standing
in the community. in order to satisfy his mind, i am willing to let him
see the ring.

to let him see the ring? repeated the lady, in surprise.

yes. here, my lad, taking the ring from his pocket, this is the ring.
you will see at once that it is not yours.

i see that it is mine, said paul, taking the proffered ring, and
preparing to go, astonished at his own good fortune in so easily
recovering it.

not so fast! exclaimed mr. montgomery, seizing him by the shoulder.
help! police!

an officer had turned the corner just before, and it was this that had
suggested the trap. he came up quickly, and, looking keenly from one to
the other, inquired what was the matter.

this boy has just purloined a ring from my wife, said mr. montgomery.
fortunately i caught him in the act.

give up the ring, you young scoundrel! said the officer, imposed upon
by the clerical appearance of the adventurer.

it is mine, said paul.

none of your gammon! give up the ring, and come with me.

the ring was restored to mr. montgomery, who overwhelmed the officer
with a profusion of thanks.

it is not a diamond, only an imitation, he said, but my wife values
it as the gift of a friend. don't be too hard on the boy. he may not be
so bad as he seems.

i'll attend to him, said the policeman, emphatically. i'll learn him
to rob ladies of rings in the street. come along, sir!

paul tried to explain matters, but no attention was paid to his
protestations. to his anger and mortification he saw the swindler
make off triumphantly with the ring, while he, the wronged owner, was
arrested as a thief.

but at the station-house he had his revenge. he was able to prove to his
captor that he had lodged information against mr. montgomery, and the
policeman in turn was mortified to think how readily he had been
imposed upon. of course paul was set free, but the officer's blundering
interference seemed to render the recovery of the ring more doubtful
than ever.



chapter xxii

a man of resources

well, that was a narrow escape, said mr. montgomery, with a sigh of
relief. i think i managed rather cleverly, eh?

i wanted to box the boys ears, said mrs. montgomery, sharply.

it wouldn't have been in character, my dear. ha, ha! he laughed,
softly, we imposed upon the officer neatly. our young friend got rather
the worst of it.

why don't you call things by their right names? he isn't much of a
friend.

names are of no consequence, my dear.

well, what are you going to do next? asked the lady, abruptly.

about the ring?

of course.

i hardly know, said mr. montgomery, reflectively. if it were not for
appearing too anxious, i would go back to ball & black's now that our
young friend is otherwise engaged, and can't interrupt us.

suppose we go?

well, you see, it might be considered rather soon for you to recover
from your fit. besides, i don't know what stories this boy may have
thought fit to tell about us.

he didn't have time to say anything.

perhaps you are right.

we want to dispose of the ring as soon as possible, and leave the
city.

that is true. well, if you say so, we will go back.

it seems to me now is the best time. the boy will tell his story to the
officer and we may be inquired for.

then, my dear, i will follow your advice.

mr. and mrs. montgomery turned, and directed their steps again toward
broadway. the distance was short, and fifteen minutes had scarcely
elapsed since they left the store before they again entered it. they
made their way to the lower end of the store and accosted the same clerk
with whom they had before spoken.

is your wife better? he asked.

much better, thank you. a turn in the air always relieves her, and she
is quite herself again. i have returned because it is necessary for
me to leave the city by the evening train, and my time is, therefore,
short. will you be kind enough to show the ring to your employer, and
ask him if he will purchase?

the clerk returned, and said that the firm would pay two hundred and
fifty dollars, but must be assured of his right to dispose of it.

did you mention my name? asked the adventurer.

i mentioned that you were a clergyman. i could not remember the name.

the rev. mr. barnes, of hayfield centre, connecticut. i have been
preaching there for--is it six or seven years, my dear?

seven, said his wife.

i should think that would be sufficient. you may mention that to mr.
ball or mr. black, if you please. i presume after that he will not be
afraid to purchase.

mr. montgomery said this with an air of conscious respectability and
high standing, which might readily impose upon strangers. but, by bad
luck, what he had said was heard by a person able to confute him.

did you say you were from hayfield centre? asked a gentleman, standing
a few feet distant.

yes, said mr. montgomery.

i think you said your name was barnes?

yes, sir.

and that you have been preaching there for the last seven years?

yes, sir, answered mr. montgomery, but there was rather less
confidence in his tone. in fact he was beginning to feel uneasy.

it is very strange, said the other. i have a sister living in
hayfield centre, and frequently visit the place myself, and so of course
know something of it. yet i have never heard of any clergyman named
barnes preaching there.

mr. montgomery saw that things looked critical.

you are strangely mistaken, sir, he said. however, i will not press
the sale. if you will return the ring (to the clerk) i will dispose of
it elsewhere.

but the clerk's suspicions had been aroused by what had been said.

i will first speak to mr. ball, he said.

there is no occasion to speak to him. i shall not sell the ring to-day.
to-morrow, i will come with witnesses whose testimony will outweigh that
of this gentleman, who i suspect never was in hayfield centre in his
life. i will trouble you for the ring.

i hope you don't intend to give it to him, said the gentleman. the
presumption is that, as he is masquerading, he has not come by it
honestly.

i shall not deign to notice your insinuations, said mr. montgomery,
who concealed beneath a consequential tone his real uneasiness. the
ring, if you please.

don't give it to him.

as the clerk seemed disinclined to surrender the ring, mr. montgomery
said: young man, you will find it to be a serious matter to withhold my
property.

perhaps i had better give it to him, said the clerk, imposed upon by
the adventurer's manner.

require him to prove property. if it is really his, he can readily do
this.

my dear, said the rev. mr. barnes, we will leave the store.

what, and leave the ring?

for the present. i will invoke the aid of the police to save me from
being robbed in this extraordinary manner.

he walked to the street door, accompanied by his wife. he was deeply
disappointed at the failure of the sale, and would gladly have wreaked
vengeance upon the stranger who had prevented it. but he saw that
his safety required an immediate retreat. in addition to his own
disappointment, he had to bear his wife's censure.

if you had the spirit of a man, mr. montgomery, she commenced, you
wouldn't have given up that ring so easily. he had no business to keep
it.

i would have called in a policeman if i dared, but you know i am not on
the best of terms with these gentlemen.

are we to lose the ring, then?

i am afraid so, unless i can make them believe in the store that i am
really what i pretend to be.

can't you do it?

not very easily, unless stay, i have an idea. do you see that young
man?

he directed his wife's attention to a young man, evidently fresh from
the country, who was approaching, staring open-eyed at the unwonted
sights of the city. he was dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons,
while his pantaloons, of a check pattern, terminated rather higher up
than was in accordance with the fashion.

yes, i see him, said mrs. montgomery. what of him?

i am going to recover the ring through his help.

i don't see how.

you will see.

how do you do? said the adventurer, cordially, advancing to the young
man, and seizing his hand.

pretty smart, said the countryman, looking surprised.

are your parents quite well?

they're so's to be around.

when did you come to the city?

this mornin'.

do you stay any length of time?

i'm goin' back this afternoon.

you didn't expect to meet me now, did you? asked mr. montgomery.

i s'pose i'd orter know you, said the perplexed youth, but i can't
think what your name is.

what! not know mr. barnes, the minister of hayfield centre? don't you
remember hearing me preach for your minister?

seems to me i do, answered the young man, persuading himself that he
ought to remember.

of course you do. now, my young friend, i am very glad to have met
you.

so am i, said the other, awkwardly.

you can do me a favor, if you will.

of course, i will, said jonathan, if it's anything i can do.

yes, you will have no trouble about it. you see, i went into a
jeweler's near by to sell a valuable ring, and they wanted to make sure
i was really a minister, and not intending to cheat them. if you will go
in with me, and say that you have often heard me preach, and that i am
the rev. mr. barnes, of hayfield centre, i won't mind paying you five
dollars for your trouble.

all right; i'll do it, said the rustic, considering that it would be
an unusually easy way of earning few dollars.

you'll remember the name, won't you?

yes--parson barnes, of hayfield centre.

that is right. the store is near by. walk along with us, and we will be
there in five minutes.



chapter xxiii

a new expedient

i believe your name is peck? said mr. montgomery, hazarding a guess.

no, it's young, ephraim young.

of course it is. i remember now, but i am apt to forget names. you said
your parents were quite well?

yes, they're pretty smart.

i am glad to hear it; i have the pleasantest recollections of your
excellent father. let me see, didn't you call there with me once, mrs.
barnes?

not that i remember.

you must go with me the next time. i want you to know the parents
of our young friend. they are excellent people. do you go back this
afternoon, mr. young?

yes, i guess so. you don't know of any sitooation i could get in a
store round here, do you?

not at present, but i have some influential friends to whom i will
mention your name. suppose, now, i could obtain a situation for you, how
shall i direct the letter letting you know?

just put on the letter 'ephraim young.' everybody in plainfield knows
me.

so he lives in plainfield, said mr. montgomery to himself. it's as
well to know that. then aloud: i won't forget, mr. young. what sort of
business would you prefer?

any kind that'll pay, said the gratified youth, firmly convinced
of his companion's ability to fulfill his promise. i've got tired of
stayin' round home, and i'd like to try york a little while. folks say
it's easy to make money here.

you are right. if i were a business man, i would come to new york at
once. for a smart young man like you it offers a much better opening
than a country village.

that's what i've told dad often, said the rustic, but he's afraid i
wouldn't get nothing to do and he says it's dreadful expensive livin'
here.

so it is expensive, but then you will be better paid than in the
country. however, here we are. you won't forget what i told you?

no--i'll remember, said the young man.

the reappearance of mr. barnes and wife so soon excited some surprise
in the store, for it had got around, as such things will, that he was an
impostor, and it was supposed that he would not venture to show his face
there again. the appearance of his rustic companion likewise attracted
attention. certainly, mr. montgomery (it makes little difference what we
call him) did not exhibit the slightest appearance of apprehension, but
his manner was quite cool and self-possessed. he made his way to that
part of the counter attended by the clerk with whom he had before
spoken. he observed with pleasure and relief that the man who had
questioned his identity with any of the ministers of hayfield centre
was no longer in the store. this would make the recovery of the ring
considerably easier.

well, sir, he said, addressing the clerk, i suppose you did not
expect to see me again so soon?

no, sir.

nor did i expect to be able to return for the ring before to-morrow,
not supposing that i could bring witnesses to prove that i was what
i represented. but fortunately i met just now a young friend, who
can testify to my identity, as he has heard me preach frequently in
plainfield, where he resides. mr. young, will you be kind enough to tell
this gentleman who i am?

parson barnes, of hayfield centre, said the youth, confidently.

you have heard me preach, have you not, in plainfield?

yes, said the young man, fully believing that he was telling the
truth.

and i have called on your parents?

yes.

i think, said the adventurer, that will be sufficient to convince you
that i am what i appear.

it was hard to doubt, in the face of such evidence. ephraim young was so
unmistakably from the rural districts that it would have been absurd to
suspect him of being an artful city rogue. besides, mr. barnes himself
was got up so naturally that all the clerk's doubts vanished at once. he
concluded that the customer who had questioned his genuineness must be
very much mistaken.

i ought to apologize to you, sir, he said, for doubting your word.
but in a city like this you know one has to be very careful.

of course, said the adventurer, blandly, i do not blame you in the
least. you only did your duty, though it might have cost me some trouble
and inconvenience.

i am sorry, sir.

no apologies, i beg. it has all turned out right, and your mistake
was a natural one. if you will kindly return me the ring, i will defer
selling it, i think, till another day.

the clerk brought the ring, which he handed back to mr. montgomery. the
latter received it with so much the more satisfaction, as he had made
up his mind at one time that it was gone irrevocably, and put it away in
his waistcoat pocket.

i had intended to buy some silver spoons, he said, but it will be
necessary to wait until i have disposed of the ring. however, i may as
well look at some, eh, mrs. barnes?

if you like, assented the lady.

so the pair examined some spoons, and fixed upon a dozen, which they
said they would return and buy on the next day, and then, with a
polite good-by, went out of the store, leaving behind, on the whole, a
favorable impression.

ephraim young accompanied them out, and walked along beside them in the
street. he, too, was in good spirits, for had not his companion promised
him five dollars for his services, which he had faithfully rendered?
five dollars to the young man from the rural districts was a very
considerable sum of money--quite a nugget, in fact--and he already
enjoyed in advance the pleasure which he anticipated of telling his
friends at home how easily he had earned such a sum in york. he walked
along beside the adventurer, expecting that he would say something about
paying him, but no allusion was made by the adventurer to his
promise. indeed, five dollars was considerably more than he had in his
possession. when they reached amity street, for they were now proceeding
up broadway, he sought to shake off the young man, whose company he no
longer desired.

this is our way, he said. i suppose you are going further. i am very
glad to have met you, mr. young. i hope you will give our regards to
your excellent parents; and he held out his hand in token of farewell.

ain't you goin' to pay me that money? said ephraim, bluntly, becoming
alarmed at the prospect of losing the nugget he had counted on with so
much confidence.

bless me, i came near forgetting it! i hope you will excuse me, and
to ephraim's delight he drew out his pocketbook. but the prospect of
payment was not so bright as the young man supposed.

i don't think i have a five-dollar bill, said mr. montgomery, after an
examination of the pocketbook. mrs. montgomery, do you happen to have a
five with you?

no, i haven't, said the lady, promptly. i spent all my money shopping
this morning.

that is unfortunate. our young friend has rendered us such a service i
don't like to make him wait for his money.

ephraim young looked rather blank at this suggestion.

let me see, i have a hundred-dollar bill here, said mr. montgomery.
i will go into the next store, and see if i can't get it changed. mr.
young, will you be kind enough to remain with my wife?

certain, said ephraim, brightening up.

mr. montgomery went into a shop near by, but made no request to have a
hundred-dollar bill changed. he was rather afraid that they might comply
with his request, which would have subjected him to some embarrassment.
he merely inquired if he could use a pen for a moment; request which was
readily granted. in less than five minutes he emerged into the street
again. ephraim young looked toward him eagerly.

i am sorry to say, my young friend, he remarked, that i was unable to
get my bill changed. i might get it changed at a bank, but the banks are
all closed at this hour.

the countryman looked disturbed.

i am afraid, continued mr. montgomery, i must wait and send you the
money in a letter from hayfield centre.

i'd rather have it now, said ephraim.

i am sorry to disappoint you, said the adventurer smoothly; but after
all you will only have a day or two to wait. to make up to you for the
delay i have decided to send you ten dollars instead of five. finding
i could not change my bill, i wrote a note for the amount, which i will
hand you.

ephraim received the paper, which the other handed him, and read as
follows:

new york, sept 15, 18--.

three days from date i promise to pay mr. ephraim young ten dollars.

jotham barnes, of hayfield centre.

how will that do? asked the adventurer. by waiting three days you
double your money.

you'll be sure to send it, said ephraim, doubtfully.

my young friend, i hope you do not doubt me, said the rev. mr. barnes,
impressively.

i guess it's all right, said ephraim, only i thought i might like to
spend the money in the city.

much better save it up, said the other. by and by it may come in
useful.

ephraim carefully folded up the note, and deposited it in an immense
wallet, the gift of his father. he would have preferred the money which
it represented: but three days would soon pass, and the ten dollars
would be forwarded to him. he took leave of his new acquaintances, mr.
montgomery shaking his hand with affectionate warmth, and requesting him
to give his best respects to his parents. when ephraim was out of sight
he returned to his wife, with a humorous twinkle in his eye, and said:

wasn't that cleverly done, old lady?

good enough! remarked the lady. now you've got the ring back again,
what are you going to do with it?

that, my dear, is a subject which requires the maturest consideration.
i shall endeavor to convert it as soon as possible into the largest
possible sum in greenbacks. otherwise i am afraid our board bill, and
the note i have just given to my rural friend, will remain unpaid.



chapter xxiv

mr. montgomery's arrest

having shaken off his country acquaintance, of whom he had no further
need, mr. montgomery started to return to his lodgings. on the whole,
he was in good spirits, though he had not effected the sale of the ring.
but it was still in his possession, and it had a tangible value.

i am sorry you did not sell the ring, said mrs. montgomery.

so am i, said her husband. we may have to sell it in some other
city.

we can't leave the city without money.

that's true, returned her husband, rather taken aback by what was
undeniably true.

we must sell the ring, or raise money on it, in new york.

i don't know but you are right. the trouble is, there are not many
places where they will buy so expensive an article. besides, they will
be apt to ask impertinent questions.

you might go to a pawnbroker's.

and get fleeced. if i got a quarter of the value from a pawnbroker, i
should be lucky.

we must do something with it, said mrs. montgomery, decidedly.

right, my dear. we must get the sinews of war somewhere. richard will
never be himself again till his pocketbook is lined with greenbacks. at
present, who steals my purse steals trash.

suppose you try tiffany's?

the ring has already been offered there. they might remember it.

if they do, say that he is your son.

a good thought, answered the husband. i will act upon it. but, on the
whole, i'll doff this disguise, and assume my ordinary garments. this
time, my dear, i shall not need your assistance.

well, the sooner it's done the better. that's all i have to say.

as soon as possible.

mr. montgomery returned to his lodgings in amity street, and, taking
off his clerical garb, appeared in the garb in which we first made his
acquaintance. the change was very speedily effected.

wish me good luck, mrs. m., he said, as he opened the door. i am
going to make another attempt.

good luck to you, tony! come back soon.

as soon as my business is completed. if i get the money, we will leave
for philadelphia this evening. you may as well be packing up.

i am afraid the landlady won't let us carry away our baggage unless we
pay our bill.

never mind! pack it up, and we'll run our chance.

felix montgomery left the house with the ring carefully deposited in
his vest pocket. to judge from his air of easy indifference, he
might readily have been taken for a substantial citizen in excellent
circumstances; but then appearances are oftentimes deceitful, and they
were especially so in the present instance.

he made his way quickly to broadway, and thence to tiffany's, at that
time not so far uptown as at present. he entered the store with a
nonchalant air, and, advancing to the counter, accosted the same clerk
to whom paul had shown the ring earlier in the day.

i have a valuable ring which i would like to sell, he said. will you
tell me its value?

the clerk no sooner took it in his hand than he recognized it.

i have seen that ring before, he said, looking at mr. montgomery
keenly.

yes, said the latter, composedly; this morning, wasn't it?

yes.

my boy brought it in here. i ought not to have sent him, for he came
very near losing it on the way home. i thought it best to come with it
myself.

this was said so quietly that it was hard to doubt the statement, or
would have been if information had not been brought to the store that
the ring had been stolen.

yes, boys are careless, assented the clerk, not caring to arouse mr.
montgomery's suspicions. you wish to sell the ring, i suppose.

yes, answered the other; i don't like to carry a ring of so great
value. several times i have come near having it stolen. will you buy
it?

i am not authorized to make the purchase, said the clerk. i will
refer the matter to mr. tiffany.

very well, said mr. montgomery. i am willing to accept whatever he
may pronounce a fair price.

no doubt, thought the clerk.

he carried the ring to his employer, and quickly explained the
circumstances.

the man is doubtless a thief. he must be arrested, said the jeweler.

if i go for an officer, he will take alarm.

invite him to come into the back part of the shop, and i will protract
the negotiation while you summon a policeman.

the clerk returned, and at his invitation mr. montgomery walked to
the lower end of the store, where he was introduced to the head of the
establishment. sharp though he was, he suspected no plot.

you are the owner of this ring? asked mr. tiffany.

yes, sir, said the adventurer. it has been in our family for a long
time.

but you wish to sell it now?

yes; i have come near losing it several times, and prefer to dispose of
it. what is its value?

that requires some consideration. i will examine it closely.

mr. montgomery stood with his back to the entrance, waiting patiently,
while the jeweler appeared to be engaged in a close examination of the
ring. he congratulated himself that no questions had been asked which
it might have been difficult for him to answer. he made up his mind
that after due examination mr. tiffany would make an offer, which he
determined in advance to accept, whatever it might be, since he would
consider himself fortunate to dispose of it at even two-thirds of its
value.

meanwhile the clerk quietly slipped out of the store, and at a short
distance encountered a policeman, upon whom he called for assistance.
at the same moment paul and mr. preston came up. our hero, on being
released from arrest, had sought mr. preston, and the latter obligingly
agreed to go with him to tiffany's, and certify to his honesty, that, if
the ring should be brought there, it might be retained for him. paul did
not recognize the clerk, but the latter at once remembered him.

are you not the boy that brought a diamond ring into our store this
morning? he asked.

into tiffany's?

yes.

have you seen anything of it? asked our hero, eagerly. i am the one
who brought it in.

a man just brought it into the store, said the clerk.

is he there now?

he is talking with mr. tiffany. i came out for a policeman. he will be
arrested at once.

good! ejaculated paul; i am in luck. i thought i should never see the
ring again. what sort of a man is he?

from the description, paul judged that it was felix montgomery himself,
and, remembering what a trick the adventurer had played upon him at
lovejoy's hotel, he felt no little satisfaction in the thought that the
trapper was himself trapped at last.

i'll go along with you, he said. i want to see that man arrested.

you had better stay outside just at first, until we have secured him.

meanwhile mr. tiffany, after a prolonged examination, said: the ring is
worth two hundred and fifty dollars.

that will be satisfactory, said mr. montgomery, promptly.

shall i give you a check for the amount? asked the jeweler.

i should prefer the money, as i am a stranger in the city, and not
known at the banks.

i can make the check payable to bearer, and then you will have no
difficulty in getting it cashed.

while this conversation was going on, the clerk entered the store with
the policeman, but mr. montgomery's back was turned, and he was not
aware of the fact till the officer tapped him on the shoulder, saying:
you are my prisoner.

what does this mean? there is some mistake, said the adventurer,
wheeling round with a start.

no mistake at all. you must come with me.

what have i done? you take me for some one else.

you have stolen a diamond ring.

who says so? demanded the adventurer, boldly. it is true i brought
one here to sell, but it has belonged to me for years.

you are mistaken, mr. montgomery, said paul, who had come up
unperceived. you stole that ring from me this morning, after dosing me
with chloroform at lovejoy's hotel.

it is a lie, said the adventurer, boldly. that boy is my son. he is
in league with his mother to rob me. she sent him here this morning
unknown to me. finding it out, i took the ring from him, and brought it
here myself.

paul was certainly surprised at being claimed as a son by the man who
had swindled him, and answered: i never saw you before this morning. i
have no father living.

i will guarantee this boy's truth and honesty, said mr. preston,
speaking for the first time. i believe you know me, mr. tiffany.

i need no other assurance, said the jeweler, bowing. officer, you may
remove your prisoner.

the game is up, said the adventurer, finding no further chance for
deception. i played for high stakes, and i have lost the game. i have
one favor to ask. will some one let my wife know where i am?

give me her address, said paul, and i will let her know.

no. ---- amity street. ask her to come to the station-house to see me.

i will go at once.

thank you, said mr. montgomery; as i am not to have the ring, i don't
know that i am sorry it has fallen into your hands. one piece of advice
i will venture to offer you, my lad, he added, smiling. beware of any
jewelers hailing from syracuse. they will cheat you, if you give them a
chance.

i will be on my guard, said paul. can i do anything more for you?

nothing, thank you. i have a fast friend at my side, who will look
after me.

the officer smiled grimly at the jest, and the two left the store arm in
arm.

do you still wish to sell this ring? asked mr. tiffany, addressing
paul.

yes, sir.

i renew my offer of this morning. i will give you two hundred and fifty
dollars.

i shall be glad to accept it.

the sale was quickly effected, and paul left the store with what seemed
to him a fortune in his pocket.

be careful not to lose your money, said mr preston.

i should like to place a hundred and fifty dollars in your hands, said
paul, turning to mr. preston.

i will willingly take care of it for you, and allow you interest upon
it.

the transfer was made, and, carefully depositing the balance of the
money in his pocketbook, our hero took leave of his friend and sought
the house in amity street.



chapter xxv

paul's final success

mrs. montgomery impatiently awaited the return of her husband. meanwhile
she commenced packing the single trunk which answered both for her
husband and herself. she was getting tired of new york, and anxious to
leave for philadelphia, being fearful lest certain little transactions
in which she and her husband had taken part should become known to the
police.

she had nearly completed her packing when paul rang the doorbell.

the summons was answered by the landlady in person.

is mrs. montgomery at home? asked paul.

no such lady lives here, was the answer.

it occurred to paul as very possible that mr. montgomery might pass
under a variety of names. he accordingly said, perhaps i have got the
name wrong. the lady i mean is tall. i come with a message from her
husband, who is a stout man with black hair and whiskers. he gave me
this number.

perhaps you mean mr. grimsby. he and his wife live here.

probably that is the name, said paul.

i will give mrs. grimsby your message, returned the landlady, whose
curiosity was excited to learn something further about her boarders.

thank you, said paul; but it is necessary for me to see the lady
myself.

well, you can follow me, then, said the landlady, rather ungraciously.

she led the way upstairs, and knocked at the door of mrs. grimsby, or
as we will still call her, mrs. montgomery, since that name is more
familiar to the reader, and she was as much entitled to the one as the
other.

mrs. montgomery opened the door, and regarded our hero suspiciously, for
her mode of life had taught her suspicion of strangers.

here's a boy that wants to see you, said the landlady.

i come with a message from your husband, said paul.

mrs. montgomery remembered paul as the boy who was the real owner of the
diamond ring, and she eyed him with increased suspicion.

did my husband send you? when did you see him.

just now, at tiffany's, answered paul, significantly.

what is his message? asked mrs. montgomery, beginning to feel uneasy.

paul glanced at the landlady, who, in the hope of gratifying her
curiosity, maintained her stand by his side.

the message is private, he said.

i suppose that means that i am in the way, remarked the landlady,
sharply. i don't want to pry into anybody's secrets. thank heaven, i
haven't got any secrets of my own.

walk in, young man, said mrs. montgomery.

paul entered the room, and she closed the door behind him. meanwhile the
landlady, who had gone part way downstairs, retraced her steps, softly,
and put her ear to the keyhole. her curiosity, naturally strong, had
been stimulated by paul's intimation that there was a secret.

now, said mrs. montgomery, impatiently, out with it! why does my
husband send a message by you, instead of coming himself?

he can't come himself.

why can't he?

i am sorry to say that i am the bearer of bad news, said paul,
gravely. your husband has been arrested for robbing me of a diamond
ring.

where is he? demanded mrs. montgomery, not so much excited or overcome
as she would have been had this been the first time her husband had
fallen into the clutches of the law.

at the street station-house. he wants you to come and see him.

have you got the ring back?

yes.

mrs. montgomery was sorry to hear it. she hoped her husband might
be able to secrete it, in which case he would pass it over to her to
dispose of. now she was rather awkwardly situated, being without money,
or the means of making any.

i will go, she said.

paul, who was sitting next to the door, opened it suddenly, with
unexpected effort, for the landlady, whose ear was fast to the keyhole,
staggered into the room involuntarily.

so you were listening, ma'am, were you? demanded mrs. montgomery,
scornfully.

yes, i was, said the landlady, rather red in the face.

you were in good business.

it's a better business than stealing diamond rings, retorted the
landlady, recovering herself. i've long suspected there was something
wrong about you and your husband, ma'am, and now i know it. i don't want
no thieves nor jail birds in my house, and the sooner you pay your bill
and leave, the better i'll like it.

i'll leave as soon as you like, but i can't pay your bill.

i dare say, retorted the landlady. you're a nice character to cheat
an honest woman out of four weeks' board.



well, paul, what news? asked barry.

i am ready to buy your stand, said paul.

can you pay me all the money down?

on the spot.

then it is all settled, said barry, with satisfaction. i am glad of
it, for now i shall be able to go on to philadelphia to-morrow.

paul drew a roll of bills from his pocket, and proceeded to count
out thirty-five dollars. barry noticed with surprise that he had a
considerable amount left.

you are getting rich, paul, he said.

i am not rich yet, answered paul, but i mean to be some time if i can
accomplish it by industry and attention to business.

you'll be sure to succeed, said george barry. you're just the right
sort. good-by, old fellow. when you come on to philadelphia come and see
me.

i may establish a branch stand in philadelphia before long, said paul,
jocosely.



chapter xxvi

conclusion

when paul was left in charge of the stand, and realized that it was his
own, he felt a degree of satisfaction which can be imagined. he had been
a newsboy, a baggage-smasher, and in fact had pretty much gone the round
of the street trades, but now he felt that he had advanced one step
higher. some of my readers may not appreciate the difference, but to
paul it was a great one. he was not a merchant prince, to be sure,
but he had a fixed place of business, and with his experience he felt
confident he could make it pay.

i am sure i can make from ten to fifteen dollars a week, he said to
himself. i averaged over a dollar a day when i worked for george barry,
and then i only got half-profits. now i shall have the whole.

this consideration was a very agreeable one. he would be able to
maintain his mother and little jimmy in greater comfort than before, and
this he cared more for than for any extra indulgences for himself.
in fact, he could relieve his mother entirely from the necessity of
working, and yet live better than at present. when paul thought of this,
it gave him a thrill of satisfaction, and made him feel almost like a
man.

he set to work soliciting custom, and soon had sold three neckties at
twenty-five cents each.

all that money is mine, he thought, proudly. i haven't got to hand
any of it over to george barry. that's a comfort.

as this thought occurred to him he recognized an old acquaintance
strolling along the sidewalk in his direction. it was no other than jim
parker, the friend and crony of mike donovan, who will be remembered as
figuring in not a very creditable way in the earlier chapters of this
story. it so happened that he and paul had not met for some time, and
jim was quite ignorant of paul's rise in life.

as for jim himself, no great change had taken place in his appearance or
prospects. his suit was rather more ragged and dirty than when we first
made his acquaintance, having been worn night and day in the streets, by
night stretched out in some dirty alley or out-of-the-way corner,
where jim found cheap lodgings. he strolled along with his hands in his
pockets, not much concerned at the deficiencies in his costume.

hallo! said he, stopping opposite paul's stand. what are you up to?

you can see for yourself, answered paul. i am selling neckties.

how long you've been at it?

just begun.

who's your boss?

i haven't any.

you ain't runnin' the stand yourself, be you? asked jim, in surprise.

yes.

where'd you borrow the stamps?

of my mother, said paul. can't i sell you a necktie this morning?

not much, said jim, laughing at the joke. i've got my trunks stuffed
full of 'em at home, but i don't wear 'em only sundays. do you make much
money?

i expect to do pretty well.

what made you give up sellin' prize packages? asked jim slyly.


customers like you, answered paul.

jim laughed.

you didn't catch me that time you lost your basket, he said.

that was a mean trick, said paul, indignantly.

you don't want to hire me to sell for you, do you?

that's where you're right. i don't.

i'd like to go into the business.

you'd better open a second-hand clothing store, suggested paul,
glancing at his companion's ragged attire.

maybe i will, said jim with a grin, if you'll buy of me.

i don't like the style, said paul. who's your tailor?

he lives round in chatham street. say, can't you lend a fellow a couple
of shillin' to buy some breakfast?

have you done any work to-day?

no.

then you can't expect to eat if you don't work.

i didn't have no money to start with.

suppose you had a quarter, what would you do?

i'd buy a ten-cent plate of meat, and buy some evenin' papers with the
rest.

if you'll do that, i'll give you what you ask for.

you'll give me two shillin'? repeated jim, incredulously, for he
remembered how he had wronged paul.

yes, said paul. here's the money; and he drew a twenty-five-cent
piece from his vest pocket, and handed it to jim.

you give me that after the mean trick i played you? said jim.

yes; i am sorry for you and want to help you along.

you're a brick! exclaimed jim, emphatically. if any feller tries to
play a trick on you, you just tell me, and i'll lam him.

all right, jim! said paul, kindly; i'll remember it.

there ain't anybody you want licked, is there? asked jim, earnestly.

not at present, thank you, said paul, smiling.

when you do, i'm on hand, said jim. now i'll go and get some grub.

he shuffled along toward ann street, where there was a cheap
eating-house, in which ten cents would pay for a plate of meat. he was
decidedly hungry, and did justice to the restaurant, whose style of
cookery, though not very choice, suited him so well that he could
readily have eaten three plates of meat instead of one, but for the
prudent thought that compelled him to reserve enough to embark in
business afterwards. jim was certainly a hard ticket; but paul's
unexpected kindness had won him, and produced a more profound impression
than a dozen floggings could have done. i may add that jim proved luck
in his business investment, and by the close of the afternoon had enough
money to provide himself with supper and lodging, besides a small fund
to start with the next day.

paul sold three more neckties, and then, though it yet lacked an hour of
the time when he generally proposed to close, he prepared to go home. he
wanted to communicate the good news to his mother and little jimmy.

mrs. hoffman raised her eyes from her sewing as he entered.

well, paul, she said, have you heard anything of the ring?

yes, mother, it's sold.

is it? well, we must do without it, then, said his mother in a tone of
disappointment.

there won't be any trouble about that, mother, as long as we have got
the money for it. i would rather have that than the ring.

did you recover it, then? asked his mother, eagerly.

yes, mother--listen and i will tell you all about it.

he sat down and told the story to two very attentive listeners.

what did you do with the money, paul? asked jimmy.

mr. preston is keeping a hundred and fifty dollars for me. he will
allow seven per cent. interest. but i must not forget that the money
belongs to you, mother, and not to me. perhaps you would prefer to
deposit it in a savings bank.

i am quite satisfied with your disposal of it, paul, said mrs.
hoffman. i little thought, when i found the ring, that it would be of
such service to us.

it has set me up in business, said paul, and i am sure to make
money. but i am getting out of stock. i must go round and buy some more
neckties to-morrow.

how much do you pay for your ties, paul? asked his mother.

one shilling; i sell them for two. that gives me a good profit.

i wonder whether i couldn't make them? said mrs. hoffman. i find
there is no sewing at present to be got, and, besides, she added, i
think i would rather work for you than for a stranger.

there is no need of your working, mother. i can earn enough to support
the family.

while i have health i would prefer to work, paul.

then i will bring round some of the ties to-morrow. i have two or three
kinds. there is nothing very hard about any of them. i think they would
be easy to make.

that will suit me much better than making shirts.

suppose i admit you to the firm, mother? i can get a large signboard,
and have painted on it:

paul hoffman and mother,
dealers in neckties.

how would that sound?

i think i would leave the business part in your hands, paul.

i begin to feel like a wholesale merchant already, said paul. who
knows but i may be one some day?

many successful men have begun as low down, said his mother; with
energy and industry much may be accomplished.

do you think i'll ever be a wholesale painter? asked jimmy, whose
small ears had drank in the conversation.

better try for it, jimmy, said paul. i don't know exactly what a
wholesale painter is, unless it's one who paints houses.

i shouldn't like that, said the little boy.

then, jimmy, you'd better be a retail painter.

i guess i will, said jimmy, seriously.

     note: thus far we have accompanied paul hoffman in his
     career.  he is considerably better off than when we met him
     peddling prize packages in front of the post office.  but we
     have reason to believe that greater success awaits him.  he
     will figure in the next two volumes of this series, more
     particularly in the second, to be called slow and sure; or,
     from the sidewalk to the shop. before this appears,
     however, i propose to describe the adventures of a friend
     and protegee of paul's--under the title of phil the fiddler;
     or, the young street musician.





end of the project gutenberg ebook of paul the peddler, by horatio alger, jr.

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook paul the peddler ***

***** this file should be named 659-0.txt or 659-0.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/5/659/

produced by charles keller and david widger

updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project
gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b.  project gutenberg is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (the foundation
 or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.

1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.

1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase project
gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase project gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original plain vanilla ascii or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4, information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
     license.  you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg-tm works.

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.


section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

for additional contact information:
     dr. gregory b. newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
