the project gutenberg ebook of the master of silence, by irving bacheller

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: the master of silence

author: irving bacheller

release date: february, 2005 [ebook #7486]
posting date: july 27, 2009
last updated: march 12, 2018

language: english

character set encoding: utf-8

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the master of silence ***




produced by jeffrey kraus-yao





the master of silence

a romance


fiction, fact, and fancy series

edited by arthur stedman


by irving bacheller


new york charles l. webster & co. 1892





the master of silence



chapter i


near the end of my fourteenth year i was apprenticed to valentine, king
& co., cotton importers, liverpool, as a pair of legs. my father
had died suddenly, leaving me and his property in the possession of my
stepmother and my guardian. it was in deference to their urgent advice
that i left my home in london (with little reluctance, since my life
there had never been happy) to study the art of money-making. on
arriving at the scene of my expected triumphs i was assigned to the
somewhat humble position of errand boy. in common with other boys who
performed a like service for the firm i was known as a pair of legs.
 lodgings of a rather modest character had been secured for me in the
western outskirts of the city near the banks of the mersey. i was slow
to make friends, and my evenings were spent in the perusal of some story
books, which i had brought with me from london. one night, not long
after the beginning of my new life in liverpool, i was lying in bed
listening to the wind and rain beating over the housetops and driving
against the windows, when suddenly there came a loud rap at my door.

who's there? i demanded, starting out of bed.

as i heard no answer, i repeated my inquiry and stood a moment
listening. i could hear nothing, however, but the wind and rain.
lighting a candle and dressing myself with all haste, i opened the
door. i could just discern the figure of a bent old man standing in
the hallway, when a gust of wind suddenly put out the candle. the door
leading to the street was open, and the old man was probably a straggler
come to importune me for shelter or for something to eat. as i relit the
candle, he entered my room and stood facing me, but he did not speak.
his clothes were dripping and he was blinking at me with strange,
gleaming eyes. his hair was snow-white, and as i looked into his face
the deathly pallor of it frightened me. his general appearance was more
than startling; it was uncanny.

what can i do for you? i asked.

greatly to my surprise he made no reply, but with a look of pain and
great anxiety sank into a chair. then he withdrew from his pocket a
letter which he extended to me. the envelope was wet and dirty. it was
directed to kendric lane, esq., no. old broad street, london, england.
the address was crossed and 22 kirkland street, liverpool, written
under it in the familiar hand of my guardian. a strange proceeding!
thought i. was the letter intended for my father, who was long dead, and
who had removed from that address more than ten years ago? the old man
began to grin and nod as i examined the superscription. i broke the seal
on the envelope and found the following letter, undated, and with no
indication of the place from which it was sent:

dear brother--i need your help. come to me at once if you can.
consequences of vast importance to me and to mankind depend upon your
prompt compliance. i cannot tell you where i am. the bearer will bring
you to me. follow him and ask no questions. moreover, be silent, like
him, regarding the subject of this letter. if you can come, procure
passage in the first steamer for new york. my messenger is provided with
funds. your loving brother,

revis lane.

i had often heard my father speak of my uncle revis, who went to america
almost twenty years before i was born. now he was my nearest living
relative. no news of him had reached us for many years before my father
died. i was familiar with his handwriting and the specimen before me was
either genuine, or remarkably like it. if genuine he had evidently not
heard of my father's death.

extraordinary as the message was, the messenger was more so. he sat
peering at me with a strange, half-crazed expression on his face.

when did you leave my uncle? i asked.

he sat as if unconscious that i had spoken.

i drew my chair to his side and repeated the words in a loud voice, but
he did not seem to hear me. evidently the old man could neither hear nor
speak. in a moment he began groping in his pockets, and presently handed
me a card which contained the following words:

if you can come, tear this card in halves and return the right half to
him.

i examined the card carefully. the words were undoubtedly in my uncle's
handwriting. the back of the card was covered with strange characters in
red ink. i tore the card as directed and handed him the right half.

he held it up to the light and examined it carefully, then put it away
in a pocket of his waistcoat. the look of pain returned to his face,
and he coughed feebly as if suffering from a severe cold. the hour being
late i intimated by pantomime that i desired him to occupy my bed. he
understood me readily enough and began feebly to remove his clothing,
while i prepared a sofa for myself. he was soon sound asleep, but i lay
awake long after the light was extinguished. he was evidently quite
ill, and i determined to go for a physician at the first appearance of
daylight. as soon as possible i would go with him to my uncle. there
were no ties to detain me, and it was clearly my duty to do so. perhaps
my uncle was in some great peril. if so, i might be of service to him.

when i arose in the morning my strange lodger seemed to be sleeping
quietly. his face looked pale and ghastly in the light of day. i stepped
close to his bed and, laying my hand upon his brow, was horrified
to discover that he was dead. what was i to do? i sat down to think,
trembling with fright. i must call in a policeman and tell him all i
knew about my strange visitor. no, not all; i must not tell him about
the letter, thought i. my uncle might not wish it to be published to the
world. i ran out upon the street and told the first officer i met how
the old man had rapped at my door during the storm; how i had given him
my bed out of pity, and how i had discovered on awaking in the morning
that he was dead.

that day the body was taken to the morgue. the sum of l100 were found in
his pockets, a part of which gave him a decent burial. but while he had
gone to his long rest, he had sown in my mind the seed of unrest. i went
about my work clinging to the thread of a mystery half told. whither
would it lead me?

strange as that messenger had seemed, he was certainly a good man to
carry secrets.



chapter ii


the multitude of legs, engaged by the pair in the service of valentine,
king & co., were distinguished from each other by a bit of house slang.
i was known as last legs among my companions for some time after
my initiation to the warehouse. at first i was inclined to resent the
reduction of my individuality to such a vulgar formula, but as i became
inured to hard tasks the sharpness of this indignity wore away.

there was one pair of legs doing service for the firm whose owner became
my most valued friend and confidant. in his business capacity he was
called long legs, but his proper name was philbert chaffin. he was
a tall, slim boy, with blue eyes and light hair, the son of a stage
carpenter, who was employed at one of the cheap theatres and who
lived within a stone's throw of my lodgings. his language was a unique
combination of bad grammar and provincial brogue; but every boy in
the warehouse allowed that he was a good fellow. he had spent many an
evening with me, and confided to me many a secret which, owing to solemn
pledges made at that time, i am not at liberty to divulge, before he
invited me to dine and spend an evening with the family. i accepted his
invitation gratefully, and the next evening phil took me over. it was a
hearty welcome that i received at the home of the chaffins. my enjoyment
of their simple hospitality would have been perfect but for the
embarrassment i felt at the many apologies with which it was offered.
mrs. chaffin knew as 'ow the tea was not as good as i was used to
drinking, but she 'oped it didn't taste murky. i assured her that
it did not taste murky, although a little doubtful as to the exact
significance of the word when applied to tea. but in spite of my
declaration she insisted that it must taste murky to one who was
accustomed to better things. the ham was never too good in liverpool,
but she 'oped that it wasn't reesty. i solemnly declared that it was
not reesty. but mrs. chaffin and mr. chaffin out of the goodness of
their hearts continued to condole with me on the score that such ham
tasted and must taste reesty to one not used to it. i had no sooner
satisfied their misgivings concerning the ham than i was compelled to
take issue with them as to the bread, regarding which they entertained a
lurking suspicion of staleness. during all of this discussion about the
ham, the tea and the bread, i was conscious that a pair of big brown
eyes, darkly shaded with long lashes, were staring at me across the
table. whenever i had the courage to glance that way i observed that
they had been looking at me intently, and were suddenly averted. these
wondering eyes belonged to the only daughter in the family.

they've all been boys, said mrs. chaffin, since hetty was born.

i thought it strange that the h in her daughter's name was the only one
that the good woman had shown the ability to manage.

hetty is the only one of the lot that takes to books, she continued.
the head master told me she will make a good scholar, and dear a me!
she does nothing but read books from mornin' till night. while hetty
and her mother removed the dishes we drew our chairs about the fire,
and mr. chaffin, a blunt, simple-minded man, entertained me with sage
observations regarding politics and the weather. he spoke rather loudly,
and in a key which, as i learned afterward, he only employed on very
special occasions. presently the youngest lad in the family, who sat
on his father's knee, demanded a song. the response was prompt and
generous. the selection with which mr. chaffin favored us contained
upward of forty stanzas, relating the unhappy story of a fair maid and
a bold sailor, both of whom met a tragic death, in the last stanza, just
before the day set for their marriage. the song being finished, hetty
and her mother drew their chairs up to the fire; hetty sat next me,
and after a severe inward struggle i summoned the courage to ask her a
question. she answered me in the fewest words possible, but in a
voice so sweet and low that i wondered then and often afterward at
its contrast to the other voices i had heard in that house. she wore a
home-spun frock and a neat white pinafore, set off with a dainty ribbon
tied about her throat.

she's uncommon still when strangers is here, sir, said mrs. chaffin;
but law me! she goes rompitin' about the house like as if she was crazy
sometimes, ticklin' her father and tryin' t' snip off his beard with the
scissors.

that night was the beginning of happier days for me. when at last i
rose to go it was near midnight. i forgot my weariness as i walked to my
lodgings, thinking of those simple, honest people and of their kindness
to me.

i enjoyed high jinks at the house of the chaffins at least once a week
during the next year of my apprenticeship, near the close of which
i began to get ready for a visit to my stepmother in fulfilment of a
promise i had made by letter. it had been, on the whole, a happy year to
me. i had known many lonely hours, to be sure, but those visits to the
little old weather-stained house, in which i found my first friends
after leaving home, cheered me from week to week. i knew, too, that
hetty enjoyed those long evenings as much as i did, which meant more to
me than i would have dared confess to her. i thought of her a good deal,
but it always resulted in the wretched feeling that we were both very
young after all. it is not likely that i would have decided to go home
for a fortnight, but that i thought it would be pleasant to observe
the effect of saying good-by to hetty. i had no doubt that she would be
quite overcome with grief and loneliness after i had gone, and, reckless
youth that i was, nothing could have made me more happy than to have
known that she really felt grieved on my account. and yet when i called
to bid them all good-by, the evening before i started, she betrayed no
sign of regret. in fact, she seemed so much happier than usual that i
worried about it for weeks, even after i had gone so far away that it
seemed doubtful whether we would ever meet again. it did not occur to
me that i had been less skilful than she in concealing my emotions, and
that she might be merry only because she could perceive that i was sad.
mrs. chaffin was the only member of the family who seemed to entertain
feelings as serious as my own. she had dreamed that i would not come
back again, and we all laughed at her then, but when the swift years had
revealed some of their secrets, we thought of this prophetic dream with
a sadness deeper than any that comes to childish hearts. hester and phil
walked with me to the gate when i left the house. the radiance of a full
moon fell on our faces through the flying clouds. phil, stupid fellow!
had so much to say that i did not get a chance to speak to his sister
before she darted back to the house as if pursued. on reaching my
lodgings i was surprised to find a gentleman waiting for me.

don't know me, eh? said he, shaking my hand warmly.

he was a tall, portly man, with a kindly face, clean shaven except for
a pair of close-cropped, iron-gray side whiskers. i was sure i had seen
him before, but couldn't think of his name.

earl, said he, handing me a card on which his name and address were
printed as follows:

        david gordon earl,
                          barrister at law,
  lincoln's inn, london.

i remembered distinctly having accompanied my father to his office on
one occasion some years before.

i've come up from london on purpose to see you. just got here only a
few minutes ago, said he, laying off his overcoat. but upon my word!
 he added, surveying me from head to foot, i didn't expect to find such
a big, strapping fellow as you are. your surroundings are quite as i had
supposed they would be. cramped quarters in a miserable tumble-down back
street! i suppose your guardian provided this place for you?

i believe so, said i.

did you know that your stepmother had married again? he asked.

married! i exclaimed. to whom?

to martin cobb.

to my guardian? i asked, in astonishment.

not heeding my question, he continued:

you're intending to go home to-morrow, i believe?

yes, sir.

my boy, said he, i have an interest in you. i was your father's
friend and adviser for many years. i came all this distance to tell you
not to go to london. do not ask me why, i beg you, said he, with an
impatient gesture when i attempted to speak. it would do you no good to
learn my reason for making this request. listen to this--it's important
to you: there's an uncle of yours in america, your nearest relative,
i believe. of course you have heard your father speak of him. a most
eccentric fellow! but a man of fine ability. he was a graduate of oxford
and a physician of great skill and learning. thirty-five years ago he
went to canada and finally settled in a large town on one of the great
lakes not far from the border. it was detroit, i believe. your father
told me, shortly before his death, that he had not heard from your uncle
for many years. i have written to him twice within a twelvemonth, but
have received no reply. i want you to go over and look him up. if you
should find that he is dead, there's no harm done, and you can take time
to look about for a business opportunity. if you don't like it, come
back, but, if you can content yourself there for awhile, you had better
do so.

but, sir, i have no money.

you are going for me; i shall, therefore, insist upon paying the bills.
in the success of the undertaking i have, perhaps, as great an interest
as you.

when do you wish me to start? i asked.

to-night. that is to say, i would like you to leave this place at once,
go with me to a hotel, and sail by the first steamer that leaves for new
york.

ever since that strange and silent messenger had come to me with my
uncle's letter i had been haunted by a desire to go in quest of him. now
that it was possible, i hesitated. what would hester say on hearing that
i had gone to america? it would be very grand to write her from new york
that i had been suddenly called abroad on important business. would she
care? of course she would care, and i was willing to wager a sixpence
with myself that she would cry bitterly, too, on receiving the letter.
ah, what a punishment that would be for her coldness and indifference!

yes, i would go. i began picking up my things and packing them into my
box.

i conclude that you have decided to go, he said.

yes, sir. i shall be ready in a moment, i replied.

we were soon rattling over the pavements in a cab that had been waiting
at the door.

on arriving at the northwestern hotel we were informed that a steamer
would leave for new york at five in the morning. we drove at once to
the dock and having succeeded in making comfortable arrangements for my
passage mr. earl went aboard the steamer with me. in a retired corner
of the great cabin i confessed to him that there was a girl in liverpool
for whom i had a feeling of extraordinary tenderness.

he laughed heartily and insisted that i should tell him all the
particulars.

you are rather young yet to entertain so serious a passion, said he,
as he held my hand for a moment before going ashore. you will get over
it as easily as you got into it.

i sat down, unable to reply or to restrain the tears that came to my
eyes as he left me alone. i went to my stateroom at once and to bed.
what thoughts came to me as i lay there inviting sleep to turn them
into dreams, while the great ship waited for the tide! i tossed about
my berth; i prayed; i listened. at length i thought i heard my father's
voice mingled with others, and a sound of casting off--but i heard no
more.



chapter iii


one morning in early october, nearly two years after i left liverpool
that memorable night, i found myself in the little city of ogdensburg,
n. y., past which the majestic st. lawrence flows with a sleepy movement
quite in harmony with the spirit of the old town on its southern shore.
all this time i had been vainly beating about the western hemisphere in
quest of my uncle. he had left detroit many years before, but i chanced
to meet a number of men there who had known him well. although he had
enjoyed a very large practice and a wide reputation for skill, he had
made no friends that i could find. he was a man of few words, they told
me, and was never seen about the city except in the discharge of his
professional duties. various and conflicting opinions were expressed
as to whither he had gone, in testing which i had visited no less than
twenty cities, making careful inquiries, especially among medical men.
occasionally i struck what seemed to be a promising clew, which only
increased my confusion and left me more hopelessly in the dark. i had
reported my movements to mr. earl as often as once a week and i received
letters from him frequently, encouraging me to continue the search and
enclosing money with which to do so. but although i had written often
to hester chaffin no word from her ever reached me. i was tired of this
fruitless quest among strangers, so far from the little that i held
dear, and i was on the point of giving up when this paragraph fell under
my eye in a montreal newspaper:

           a mysterious character.

one who has ever passed the city of ogdensburg by steamer will no doubt
recall a large gambrel-roofed house standing near the water's edge, just
out of the town, surrounded by towering trees and enclosed on all sides
by a wall nearly as high as the eaves of the building. the wall suggests
an asylum, a house of detention or some like place set apart for the
unfortunate members of society. in reality, however, it is the residence
of a mysterious recluse of the name of lane, who shut himself up there
nearly eighteen years ago and has since been rarely seen. it was built
after his own plans, they say, when he came to ogdensburg with his wife,
who died soon afterward. nobody knows whence he came or anything of his
past history. he is apparently a total stranger here below, holding no
intercourse with the world beyond that enclosure. his wife is said to
have been a woman of great beauty, and her death doubtless threw him
into a morbid state of mind, from which he has never rallied. many
years ago he is known to have bought a full-grown african lion from a
traveling menagerie, and, soon after, he erected the wall, presumably
out of regard for the public safety. passers along the street have
caught an occasional glimpse of him through the high gate, walking in
the grounds surrounding his house, with the lion at his heels apparently
in complete subjection to its master. a dense thicket runs along the
wall on all sides within the enclosure, which, according to local
tradition, is alive with rattlesnakes, bred for some strange purpose
known only to himself--perhaps to make his isolation more secure.

he is supposed to have resigned the companionship of men for study and
scientific research. he has no children, and his only servant being a
deaf-mute, who is almost an idiot, there is little chance at present of
learning anything of his life. for more than two years nothing has been
seen of the mysterious master of the house. his disappearance would, we
think, be a legitimate subject of investigation by the authorities
of the town. may he not have been eaten by the lion, or killed by the
rattlesnakes? who knows?

my heart was beating fast and my hands shook as if stricken with palsy
before i had finished the paragraph. the strange old man who had come
to me in liverpool that night was probably the mute servant to which
the article referred. in an hour i was on the way to ogdensburg, quite
confident that the issue of my wanderings was at hand. i reached that
town next morning nearly two years, as i have said, after the beginning
of my journey to the new world. not stopping to breakfast even, i
started out to find the house, which my busy imagination had already
pictured for itself. the first townsman i saw directed me to the place.

follow the turnpike, said he. 'sa mild or more--straight ahead.
you'll know it when y' git there. 's' queer place an' stan's off by
itself.

the man was going my way, evidently to begin his day's work, for it was
then early in the morning, and i walked along with him.

folks say, he continued, them grounds is full of hejious reptyles,
an' i've heerd fellers tell queer things they've seen when passin' there
at night--red lights a-flyin' about an' spooks at the winders. an' one
night, when uncle bill jemson was comin' down the turnpike, they was a
storm come up, an' jest as he got opposite the big iron gate they was a
flash a lightnin'--an' bill says he see the ole man, his long white hair
a-flyin' in th' wind, an' a lion standin' there in front a th' house.
th' flash was out'n a minit, an' bill whipped up his hosses an' sent em
clear to mills' tavern on the dead run, said he, laughing as if it were
a good joke.

they don't nobody like th' place ner th' man, though i don' know why,
fer no one's ever passed a word with him in these parts. there 'tis,
over yender with the pines around it an' th' high wall, said he,
pointing with his finger. but my eye had already discovered the
low-built rambling house on the high banks of the river, well in the
distance, and had recognized it at once.

leaving my companion at the next turn in the road i walked hurriedly on,
and when i had reached the big iron gate i stopped and peered through
it. a gravel roadway, now overgrown with weeds, led from the gate to the
front of the house, which stood facing me. it was built entirely of
wood and consisted of four wings (at least there were no others visible)
evidently enclosing a quadrangular courtyard, the rear wings being
lower than those in front, and hidden by the latter from the view of one
standing at the gate as i was. it was only at a distance that one could
see their roofs above the enclosure. there was but one line of windows
along the front, but there was an oriel just under the peak of the main
building, and i could see a skylight here and there upon the roofs.

the blinds were closed and there was no sign of life about the
house--evidently planned with hospitable intentions, but now silent and
forbidding. i tried the gates. they were locked securely. a screen of
closely woven wire rose from the pavement half way up the iron work.
evidently it would be impossible to reach the doors without scaling
this barrier, and i was not yet ready to try an expedient so desperate.
returning to my hotel i wrote a letter to the master of the house,
telling him of my long-continued quest and of my hopes regarding our
possible kinship. day after day i anxiously awaited his reply, until
a week had passed, but no word came from him. in passing the house at
different times, however, i observed some signs of life within it--a
blind open that had been closed the day before--a faint glimmer of light
on the trees in the rear of the grounds at night, which might have come
from the back windows. even this slight encouragement was gratifying,
but as time passed without bringing any reply to my letter i began to
think that, after all, my hopes rested on very shadowy foundations. one
day i asked the local postmaster if a man of the name of lane, who lived
near that city, ever sent for his mail.

never, said he. the man is crazy, i guess, and it's wasting postage
to write him. he's a hermit, sir--a regular hermit, and is about the
same as dead, for nobody ever sees him. the tradesmen tell me that his
old servant comes out of an evening, once in a while, to buy provisions,
but he's deaf as a post and dumb as an oyster. the interview had at
least shown me the futility of trying to reach him by letter.

it was clear that only one course was open to me. i must brave the
unknown perils with which this strange man had encompassed the path
of the trespasser, and gain an entrance to the house. i sought the
seclusion of my room at once, and thought over the result of my
investigations. i had not written to my good friend in london since my
arrival in ogdensburg, and i concluded not to do so until i could give
him definite information.

late in the afternoon a slow, drizzling rain began to pour down, and
when night fell every luminary in the heavens was obscured by thick
clouds. it was a favorable time for carrying out my project, as the
darkness was intensified by a fog that had settled over the city. by
the light of my lamp i prepared for the undertaking, in such a state of
excitement that i was frequently startled by my own whispers, through
which i found myself now and then giving involuntary utterance to my
thoughts. cutting up a pair of boots which i carried in my box, i wound
my legs in leather from my ankles up above my knees, carefully drawing
on a pair of thick, long stockings to hold it in place. this precaution
would give me a comfortable sense of security, even if there were no
snakes to fear. i felt sure that the lion, if he were still living,
would be kept in some place of confinement.

it was long past bedtime, and the lights were out in every shop and
dwelling, when i started on my daring mission. the little lamps that
glared through the fog at the street corners could scarcely be seen
twenty feet away. i was so preoccupied that i frequently lost my
direction in the mud and darkness. it seemed as if i had been traveling
for hours, when at last i felt the big wall, and saw its dim bulk rising
above me and stretching away into the night. cautiously i groped along
its base until my hands felt the iron bars of the gate. then i stood for
some moments leaning against them, quite out of breath. they were cold
and wet, and chilled me to a shiver when i touched them. i peered toward
the house but could see nothing. i listened, but could hear nothing
except the beating of my own heart and the mournful sound of the pines
whose loftier branches were stirring in the still air. grasping the
heavy bars i tried to climb the gate, but, as there were no projections
on which it was possible to get a foothold, i found this an exhausting
and difficult task. i climbed repeatedly several feet above the earth,
only to lose my foothold and slide down again. finally, by exerting all
my strength, i succeeded in supporting myself with the edge of my boot
upon a crossbar about half way up; then, taking a small rope from my
pocket i threw one end of it over the gate, holding the other in my
teeth. tying it securely by a noose i climbed hand over hand to the top
and then let myself down on the other side. i was quite exhausted by the
effort (unaccustomed as i was to such burglarious enterprises) and my
fingers were torn and bleeding from forcing a hold between the iron work
and the wire screen. i remembered the gravel pathway, overgrown with
grass, that led from the big gate to a front door. i groped about in the
darkness until i felt the gravel under my feet. then i moved cautiously
along it, until i could dimly discern the outlines of the house. my
nerves were so wrought up, while i stood there holding my breath to
catch some sound from its gloomy interior, that i was near crying out
in abject terror at every step. an owl, startled from the limb of a tree
over my head, flew lazily into the upper air and across the thicket,
disturbing other birds that set up a chattering protest. stealthily i
crept from window to window, but the blinds were closed fast. finally i
came to a door that seemed to open into the main part of the building.
desperate under the strain to which my nerves had been subjected, i
knocked loudly on its upper panels. the sound echoed through the
still house and the thickly wooded grounds around it. god help me! i
whispered; will that echo never cease? it kept repeating itself from
tree to tree, until i covered my ears to stop its weird reverberations.
then i heard a low threatening sound, deep and resonant as the lower
tones of a great organ, that gradually grew louder until its volume
filled the air, and then died away, while its echoes went chasing each
other among the trees. in the silence which followed, my ear caught
another sound the like of which i had never heard before. a dozen clocks
being wound by quick turns on all sides of me would, i fancy, have
produced a similar effect. it was evident to me that my knocking had
disturbed my uncle's pets, but i was not to be frightened away. hearing
no movement in the house i tried the door, and to my astonishment it
swung open. a peculiar odor, such as one notices in a house that has
long stood empty, came to my nostrils, and again i heard that fateful
whirring, but in the darkness i could discern no object. as i crossed
the threshold the sound grew louder, and to my horror the door closed
suddenly behind me. hurriedly striking a match, i held it above my head
and peered about me. its light revealed a small apartment finished in
polished wood. along the angle of the floor was an opening, two or three
inches high, into the side walls. and half way up the wall in front of
me i saw a face--the face of a maniac it seemed to be--pale and wan,
with strange, inhuman eyes. i had scarcely glanced at it when the match
dropped from my fingers and fell slowly through the air, going out as it
struck the floor. my hands were cold, but so wet with perspiration that
they stuck to my clothing when i felt for a candle which i had brought
with me.

there are moments in every man's life that move slowly, as if carrying
the weight of years upon their backs. i shall never cease to believe
that the few seconds it took me to light that candle must stand for as
many years in any correct reckoning of my age. when its beams at last
illumined the room, the strange face was still there. had i seen it
before? it was marvellously like that other face which had haunted my
dreams so long. if it was the face of a man he must be standing on the
other side of the wall and looking through a panel.

is mr. lane at home? i asked in an unnatural tone that startled me.

but no word of reply was spoken.

i am his nephew and i have important news for him.

the face disappeared for a moment, and presently a shrunken hand,
holding a white sheet of paper, was extended through the opening. i
stepped forward, took the sheet and, withdrawing to the centre of the
room, sat down upon the floor and wrote the following message in bold
characters with my pencil:

kendric lane, son of kendric lane (deceased), late of london, england,
wishes to see dr. lane on business of importance.

i handed the message to the strange man behind the wall, who immediately
disappeared with it, closing the panel. the worst is over, thought
i, while i stood in that mysterious and silent chamber waiting for his
return. but i should not have thought so had i known what was still to
be revealed to me before the dawn of another day, and in the months that
followed, during which that house and its echoing groves were my home.
and i sometimes ask myself, in the light of later events of which that
visit was indirectly the cause, whether, had i been able to foresee
them, i would still have persevered in my purpose to know the secrets of
my uncle's house?



chapter iv


a long time i stood waiting for some reply to my message. my candle was
fast burning out, and i began to fear that after all i was likely to
leave the house no wiser than when i had entered it. suddenly a door
swung on its creaking hinges and a feeble old man, holding a lamp in one
hand, stood grinning at me in the opening. it was the same face that i
saw before, but it seemed less ghostly and unnatural now. stepping back
he beckoned me to enter. as soon as i had crossed the threshold the door
closed behind me and the old man carefully bolted it. i stood in a
large room, richly furnished, of which spiders had apparently long held
possession. great cobwebs hung like hammocks from the ceiling, and
the dust of years had settled over all. two human skeletons completely
wrapped in cobwebs, stood facing me against the opposite wall. following
my silent leader, i went through a long narrow passage, at the end of
which was a heavy door fastened with large iron bolts. before opening
it the strange old man placed the lamp upon a table and turning around
looked squarely into my face. merciful heaven! it was the face of
another man who was looking at me now! the deep lines had almost
disappeared and the eyes looked brighter and more intelligent. no,
it was the same face, for while my eyes were eagerly scanning it that
hideous grin began to deepen its wrinkles, and its owner, taking half a
dozen steps down the passageway, made an awkward motion with both hands
as if trying to indicate that i was to follow him very closely. then he
opened the big door and i was surprised to observe that it led into the
outer air. what gulf of darkness are we about to plunge into? i asked
myself, peering through the doorway; and as we stepped out i heard again
that ominous whirring. close upon his heels i followed in a narrow path,
through what seemed to be a large courtyard, overgrown with thick grass.
presently he stopped, and, taking a bunch of keys from his pocket,
unlocked a door in a back wing of the house. reaching out until his hand
touched me, as if to make sure that i was there, he swung the door
open and we stepped into a dimly lighted apartment. my mysterious guide
turned up the wick of a lamp that was burning on a table in the centre
of the room. it was a library, with great shelves of books reaching
from floor to ceiling along its walls. a large galvanic battery, globes,
charts and other contrivances that belong to the equipment of a scholar
surrounded the table. this table was used for writing evidently, for
there were pens lying on it and a human skull used as an inkstand, the
fluid being held in the cavities of the eyes. i had seated myself in
a chair and was waiting for some sign from the little old man who had
brought me there. but where was he? turning around i looked about me on
all sides. he had left the room during my momentary preoccupation. i
had scarcely seated myself again when a door opened and a venerable
man, with snow-white hair and a smooth-shaven face that was pale and
wrinkled, walked slowly toward me. i rose to my feet and advanced a step
or two. he came forward without speaking and looked steadily into my
eyes. slowly and sadly he turned his gaze upon the floor, apparently in
deep thought. a sigh broke from his lips as if some memory, stirring in
the caves of thought, had driven it forth.

the man who stood before me had deep-set gray eyes, almost concealed by
long shaggy brows not yet entirely white. his lips were thin, and drawn
closely together above a square, protruding chin. the nose was aquiline
and prominent, with large, but finely cut nostrils. altogether his was
the most picturesque face i had ever seen. suddenly he made an effort to
clear his throat.

kendric's child, said he, in a strange, low voice. he spoke slowly
and with great difficulty, as if his organs of speech were partially
paralyzed. i would not have been able to distinguish his words but for
the silence of that room and the unnatural keenness of my hearing. he
still stood motionless, his eyes upon the floor. i knew that he was
thinking of my father.

dead? he asked, looking at me inquisitively.

he is dead, i answered.

and my man--did he give you the letter?

yes; he is dead also.

dead? i thought he was dead, he repeated, slowly and thoughtfully. i,
too, am dead--long dead.

the words were separated by considerable pauses, and he faced me almost
sternly as he finished speaking them. i stood staring at him, dumb with
surprise.

why--how did you come here?

he sank into a chair, exhausted with the effort it had cost him to
speak. my presence seemed to irritate and annoy him. why, indeed, had
i come there? what should i say in reply to his question? i tried to
think.

knaves! knaves! said my uncle, in a shrill voice, rushing toward me.
in a moment he had thrown his arms about my neck and was sobbing aloud.
my heart was full and i wept with him.

fortunate child of god, said he, after a moment; you have the seed
of life--immortal life. but i beg you to go. to one like you this house
will seem an uncanny place; i can only think of it as beyond the grave.

let me stay, uncle, said i. don't send me away. perhaps i can help
you or comfort you.

poor soul! you shall stay if you will. i am in great trouble and need
help, but you are a boy--i cannot ask you to give your life to me.

he sat down before the table, breathing heavily, and beckoned me to
a chair beside him. i was quite dumfounded and knew not what to say.
presently he began writing upon large sheets of paper, handing each one
to me as soon as it was covered. the manuscript read as follows:

i am not able to talk much. to me words are a lie and an abomination.
even these i now write are misrepresenting me and deceiving you, though
i wish them to tell the truth. they will make me out an ass or a madman.
i am neither. for eighteen years i have scarcely spoken as many words. a
word or two of sanscrit now and then has met my needs, thank god! there
is an interior language for which speech is an imperfect medium. through
that interior language thought is communicated directly and truthfully.
i used it long before i came here--imperfectly, to be sure, but with a
small degree of satisfaction to myself. through it i was able to heal
the sick when others failed. i knew how they felt better than they could
tell me in feeble words. in some more perfect state of evolution, beyond
the grave, perhaps, all men will have this power and it will be perfect.
i can enjoy but an imperfect use of it until the mortal part of me
has been cast off. one trained to speech in childhood loses certain
faculties that can never be regained.

my wife died many years ago. she left me a broken heart and a child,
newly born. i had just built this house, among strangers. we intended to
devote the remainder of our lives to the study of mental phenomena. we
desired to carry on our work without interruption. we planned to live
unknown among those around us. when she died i saw in the child an
opportunity. i determined to make its life a grand experiment; to
preserve and cultivate its native intuitions--the germ of the power of
direct communication. god has vouchsafed success to me. he lives--a man
of exalted powers the like of which the world has never seen but once,
and then in christ, the very son of god. but, unlike him, my son is only
human, with weaknesses that are our common lot.

the years are flying, and strength is failing! i must die soon and he
will live. that thought burns my brain, passing through it day by day.
his life may be long extended and he cannot live alone, nor among
men, for he would be a stranger and friendless--feared and dreaded by
superstitious fools. he has never seen a human face outside these walls
nor heard a human voice but mine. i have told you my trouble.

he ceased writing, but before i had finished reading the statement some
strange influence came over me. i felt restless and uncomfortable. my
hand was shaking so that i could scarcely read the words on the last
sheet of paper. suddenly i raised my eyes and saw a young man, godlike
in form and feature, standing at my side. his face wore an expression of
indescribable eloquence. as familiar as he afterward became to me, i
can never forget the first impression which that magnificent human being
made upon my mind, as he stood there--radiating a power that i felt to
the tips of my fingers. what favored son of man was this confronting
me, born to such an inheritance of majesty and grace? i asked myself,
regarding him with amazement. he had eyes dark as night, set under a
broad forehead, about which wavy masses of tawny hair fell gracefully.
his stately form was erect and firm as a statue. for a moment his eyes
looked into mine; then he advanced and took my hand. tenderly he pressed
it to his lips, stepping back as he did so and looking at me with
a half-curious, half-amused expression. i was so startled by the
unexpected appearance of this remarkable figure that i had not, until
now, noticed that a large lion had followed him into the room and was
lying quietly at his feet. i was not afraid; indeed, the king of beasts
seemed but a part of the man's masterful presence. i do not think i
would have seen the animal but that his enormous body was lying directly
before my eyes on the floor. my uncle had been sitting with his head
resting upon his hand at the table. suddenly he rose and a strange,
guttural sound--it may have been a word from some language wholly
unfamiliar to me--passed his lips. the young man immediately left us,
the lion following closely at his heels. we both sat in silence for some
moments after he had gone. my mind had felt strange exhilaration in his
presence, and i rubbed my eyes to make sure that i was not dreaming.
when i looked at my uncle the sad expression on his face had given way
to a smile of infinite satisfaction.

he is pleased--thank god! said my uncle, in a hoarse whisper, sinking
into a chair.

i made no answer.

it was my son, he continued, with animation. rayel--that was the name
she gave him. rayel, the wonderful. he will love you as he loves me.
come, said he, rising, the night is nearly gone.

taking a lamp from the table, he beckoned me to follow him. silently
we proceeded through a narrow hallway and up one flight of stairs to a
spacious bedroom which had seemingly been prepared for my use. a candle
was burning dimly on a large dressing-case, and by its flickering light,
as soon as my uncle had gone, i looked about me and tried to think
with calmness on the experience i had passed through. bolting the door
securely, i threw open one of the window blinds. to my surprise the
first light of dawn was visible in the sky. my room was in the rear
of the house. between me and the high wall was a dense tangle of
underbrush, barely visible in the dim light. hastily undressing, i went
to bed without further delay, and was soon in deep sleep. when i awoke
it was near midday. dressing as quickly as possible, i proceeded at once
to the library, where my uncle sat waiting for me. he conducted me to
the breakfast room--a well-lighted and cheerful apartment--where he
served me with his own hands.

you shall stay, sir--you shall stay, said he, laying his hand on my
shoulder as he sat down beside me, with a smiling face. rayel loves
you. he hopes you will stay. he thinks god sent you to us.

i am glad, for i wish to stay, i said.

good! he exclaimed, in a long whisper. you have brought the world to
him. already he has seen it in your eyes. but it is good!

while i ate he asked me questions touching the changes in our family
since he left england.

i told him of my life at home after my father's death; of my hard lot
in liverpool, and of the midnight interviews with his messenger and
with mr. earl. he listened to me with grave and attentive interest, but
stopped me before i had finished, with an impatient gesture.

speak out! they meant--they meant to kill you, didn't they?

i stared at him in amazement, while ideas that were new to me flocked
into the empyrean of thought like black birds of prey. oh, no; i had
never suspected that! i would never before have permitted such a hideous
suspicion to enter my mind. was it possible that mr. earl had sent me
away from england in order to save my life? my hands began to tremble,
and i felt my face turning red and pale under the searching eyes of my
uncle.

my boy, said he, if all the murders were done that men conceive, the
devil would live alone on earth. we shall know some time--i tell you we
shall know! let us go to rayel, he said, rising and leading the way.

the interview had greatly excited him, and his speech seemed even more
halting and labored than before. many of his words were mispronounced
and separated by long pauses; but his manner was marvelously expressive,
and often a peculiar turn of the eye or movement of the hand made his
meaning clear when i was in doubt about his words.

i followed him through a long gymnasium and out upon a grassy courtyard
extending along the rear of the grounds parallel with the river wall
for a hundred yards or more, and adorned with beds of flowers. it was
completely shut off from the eye of the outside world by a thick grove
and an impenetrable growth of underbrush that reached beyond the lowest
branches of the trees. nothing but the blue sky, in which the sun was
on its downward course, the house, and the walls of living green, were
visible. out of this eden-like spot we passed into another wing of the
building with large windows looking out upon it. rayel met us at the
door, dressed in a black robe of silk that hung gracefully from his
shoulders. again he took my hand and kissed it, then looked into my eyes
with the same expression of curious interest upon his face that i had
noted before. still holding my hand, he led me across the room. for
the first time i noticed that its walls were covered with pictures,
unframed, and that an easel stood in the light of each window. we
stopped before one of them. on a large canvas that was stretched across
it i saw a likeness of myself. the eyes wore a haggard look which seemed
unnatural. but there was something strangely real about it, in spite of
that.

wonderful! said i.

rayel started at the sound of my voice, and glanced from one to the
other with a puzzled, inquiring look. turning to his father, he uttered
some strange monosyllable in a deep voice. then he took my hand and
walked back and forth across the room with me, smiling in great delight.
i was fascinated by one of the pictures which showed a great gleaming
eye with a suggestion of lightning in its fiery depths, as if taken at
the keenest flash of fury. to intensify its fierceness a human hand was
raised in front of it so as to throw a dark shadow across the canvas.

it is the lion's eye, said my uncle, who was standing near me.

there were other paintings--many of them equally strange and
wonderful--hanging on the walls, some of which contained material he
could not have derived from direct observation. it was easy to discern
in his work the fragments of nature that came within the limited command
of his own eyes--the falling snow, the changing phases of the sky and
of vegetation--for they were presented with a stronger and more vivid
touch. until the fading twilight blended all color into gloom i passed
from one canvas to another along the wall in silence, oblivious of all
save the presence of rayel, who followed close at my elbow, evidently
enjoying my admiration of his work. when i had finished looking at the
paintings i turned for some sign to indicate his further pleasure, and
discovered that he was gone. my uncle was standing near me.

it is late, said he.

we returned at once across the yard to my uncle's retreat among his
books and papers. lighting the lamps he sat down beside me.

the power of speech is returning, said he. i can talk more easily.

did i not hear you speak to your son? i asked.

yes, he answered. long ago difficulties arose. sometimes he could not
command my thoughts, nor i his. i had known fifty years of life; he had
not--hence an inequality. my physical organism had been neglected. it
was an imperfect agent of the mind. many of my faculties were lost.
these circumstances stood between us like barriers. it was the beginning
of each communication that troubled us, when our minds were working in
different channels. something was needed for a cue--a starting-point.
ten pregnant words of sanscrit were all we needed. it was easy then.

i should think he would have lost the power of speech and hearing, i
remarked.

no. music saved them--abstract music. his voice is wonderful. his
hearing is quick. rayel knows words but not speech. his mind has command
of my knowledge. he has never seen the world, but he knows about it.
i tried to begin my life anew and to forget the past. but i could not
wholly cleanse my mind of it. its memories faded slowly. i have avoided
renewing them for his sake.

he could, then, learn to speak?

with ease, and it were better if he could speak now. we will teach him
soon.

as he ceased speaking, fatigued by the unaccustomed effort, i heard low
strains of music echoing through the silent halls around us. a violin!
the tone was deep and tremulous, gradually growing louder, filling the
ear with its message, and lifting the mind to lofty heights of thought
and passion. we both sat listening for hours, and midnight came before
the last strain died away. that music was like a strange story that
drops its plummet deep into life's mysteries.

a new song! said my uncle, turning to me with surprise on his face.
he got the subject from you. we shall see.

presently rayel entered the room, bringing something in his hand--a
picture--which he held up to the lamplight. a girl's face! and
wonderfully like that of hester chaffin. i sat amazed, staring at it.
but the likeness was not exact, the face was idealized--as i had seen it
in my dream the night before. i raised my eyes to rayel's face. he was
looking at me with an expression of pain and embarrassment.



chapter v


my uncle recovered the power of speech rapidly. before i had been a week
in his house he was able to talk with comparative ease. he seemed to
enjoy my companionship, and i spent most of my time in his library,
conversing with him or conning the musty books that had long lain
unread. to me this room was a fascinating and restful place. somehow
it reminded me of an old cemetery. the time-worn books upon its shelves
stood in solemn rows, like headstones, sacred to the memory of the men
who wrote them--their titles like inscriptions half obliterated. i did
not see rayel for days after the midnight episode that gave me such a
startling revelation of his power.

do you think that rayel knows everything that passes in one's mind--a
vivid dream, for instance? i asked my uncle one day when we were alone
together.

yes, except when he is himself asleep. his command of my dreams puzzled
me at first. i thought i had put the past completely out of my mind. but
i could not hide it from him. little by little he learned everything in
my history. one day i saw him at work on a picture. it startled me.
the canvas showed a man lying on a surgeon's table. the knife had just
severed an artery in his thigh. there were four men working over him--i
was one of them. gradually the features took on a familiar expression.
his face grew paler under the brush. a few touches--the scene was
complete. the man was dead--his eyes wide open, staring at me.

my uncle paused and looked earnestly into my face.

it was a bit of your professional experience, said i. something had
reminded you of it.

the night before i dreamed about it he answered. my mind, released
from the command of my will, betrayed me.

a strange power! i exclaimed.

incredible to you! impossible to acquire unless the work begins at
birth, and then the possibilities are infinite, said he, drawing his
chair closer to mine. you know what i have done. start the new-born
mind on any highway and see how it hurries along. you can do more,
working a little while over the cradle, than all the preachers under
heaven, after its occupant has grown beyond your ministry. i tell
you, sir, the world is indifferent to its children. neglected by their
parents, subject to hired tenderness or none at all; left to the care of
ignorant or depraved nurses, and often taught little but selfishness
and greed of gain, the children of men are surrounded by destructive
agencies. can we wonder that the human mind loses in infancy so much
of its native power? but so the generations of earth are growing up,
bearing embittered fruit and sowing its seed to the four winds.
who cares for the mind and body of a child has the highest possible
mission--the most sacred of all trusts. he must give it all his time and
strength. he must lead its mind into green pastures; he must share its
joys; he must know its hopes and fears; he must give it hold on lines
of thought that reach into eternity, which will sooner or later flood it
with inspiration; he must see that the brain has a sufficient foundation
of flesh and blood and bone; he must give it all his life until the
germs of power are developed.

unfortunately, said i, most parents have other things to do and think
of.

parentage is a crime under such circumstances. it has peopled the world
with fools and knaves. it delays the coming of christ's kingdom. there
are a few wise men, but they are held down as gravitation holds the
rock. there are laws of attraction in the world of mind as in that of
matter. good and evil are its poles. every atom between them is held in
place by the operation of opposing forces. the general mass of mind
lies within narrow zones on both sides of the equatorial line of this
imaginary world. its attraction prevents any men from rising far above
or descending far below it. i tell you, sir, the intellectual world has
degrees of latitude and longitude which determine every man's location.
emancipated from the forces i have described, my son has risen to a
level beyond the attainment of men under ordinary conditions. hypocrisy
and deceit are things of which he knows nothing. i do not ascribe to
him, mind you, the possession of saintly virtues. he is a man in whom
the best potentialities of mind and body have been developed. i have
carefully avoided the danger of making him a morbid, spiritual creature.
his body is quite as wonderful as his mind.

my uncle had been pacing restlessly up and down the room as he spoke,
often pausing before me and uttering his words vehemently, with quick
gestures and flashing eyes. he did not, seemingly, expect an answer to
his remark, for, as he ceased speaking, he stepped before one of the
windows and stood for a moment looking out upon the courtyard.

see! said he suddenly, motioning to me.

i stepped to his side and, looking through the window, saw rayel running
across the lawn with the lion on his shoulders. when the beast sprang
down he seized it by the mane and tossed it about like one with the
strength of hercules. here was a man who exercised his rightful dominion
over animated nature!

the beast is very fond of him, said my uncle, and a movement of his
finger is sufficient to control it.

why did you adopt a pet so terrible? i asked.

to secure isolation, he answered. he's an object of terror to
intruders, and a source of delight to us.

you have snakes here, too, i ventured.

yes, and for the same reason, but they can't harm you now. since you
came we have killed them. they have been good friends to me, but you
were a stranger, and your life would have been in danger every day.
years ago i procured a score of them from the mountains of pennsylvania
and put them into the thickets. they multiplied like rats, and so i was
armed against invasion.

to prevent their escape i sank a screen of wire two feet below the
ground along the base of the walls; i also posted a warning inside my
gate. long ago i began to destroy them, and there were only a few left
when you came. they were good friends to me--excellent friends! he
repeated, rubbing his hands with a grim smile. for eighteen years i
have been able to carry on my work unmolested. no knowledge of what was
transpiring outside this little world has ever reached me.

how did you begin the work of teaching this interior language to
rayel? i asked.

by signs at first--gradually making them more simple and suggestive.
the elimination of signs kept pace with the development of his
intuitions. it was slow work and hard work, but i gave all my time
to it. after he became familiar with a sign, i began to make it less
pantomimic, until finally a lift of the eyebrow, a movement of the lips,
or an inclination of the head served to express my meaning. in time he
could detect the passing shades of expression in my eyes and understand
them. look at me, said he, laying his hand on my head and watching my
eyes as the firelight shone upon them, for it was now evening.

don't you know, my boy, that your eyes reflect what is passing in your
mind? then there are countless nerves and muscles in your face which
proclaim thought. they aid my intuitions to discover what you do not
speak. you wonder--ah! you are afraid!--afraid of me.

i started in my chair, for while he was looking into my eyes a strange
gleam came into his own. he turned about suddenly and looked into the
bright fire that burned on the grate before us.

never fear, he continued, nervously twirling a lock of his white hair.
never fear, sir--i am not mad. not yet. i have been afraid of it, but
my reason will outlast my life. do you ever pray?

every day, i answered.

then you employ the interior language. we commune directly with the
holy spirit. you get some message from him every day more satisfactory
than words. it's the answer of your prayers. i tell you, sir, words are
an invention of the devil. do you like rayel? he asked, turning upon me
abruptly.

you need have no doubt of that, i answered, or of my willingness to
look after him if it should be necessary--to take him away with me and
cherish him as i would a brother.

good! good! he exclaimed smiling and rubbing his hands joyfully.
i have not long to live. when the time comes, take him out among the
knaves and fools! but we must hurry: our time is short. we must prepare
him for a second birth. you will find him an apt pupil--a very apt one.
he already knows more of the world than i thought possible. i don't
think you will find him troublesome--he can help you; he will teach
you wisdom; he will enlarge the issues of your life. my fortune will be
ample for his needs: use it as you see fit. i have one servant left,
 he said, drawing his chair closer to mine and speaking scarcely above
a whisper: i would like this to be his home when i am dead. it will be
better, however, to place him in some public institution where he can
be well provided for. i shall leave a sufficient allowance for him. the
manner of its bestowal i leave entirely to your judgment. there were two
of them--you have seen the other. he was a faithful fellow. they were
poor fools, both of them, but uncommonly wise, he continued. they kept
it to themselves. i found them in an asylum twenty-five years ago. they
called them idiots. idiots! god help us!

that strange light seemed to kindle in his eyes again while he was
speaking, and it conveyed anything but a cheerful suggestion to my mind.

there is this difference between idiots and madmen, he continued. the
former are born outside the pale of human sympathy; the latter overstep
it. in either case they are not of this earth--they are embodied spirits
living in a world of their own creation, biding the time of liberation
from the flesh. and do you know, there are more madmen in the world than
it dreams of?

he stopped with a tone of sharp interrogation and looked squarely into
my face.

there are undoubtedly many of them, said i.

the lines of monomania all lead to madness, he continued. the deeper
one plunges into the mysteries of life the nearer he approaches it. but,
mark you, one man may venture further than another. for years i have
lived in fear of two things--madness and death. not on my account, but i
had rayel to think of.

my uncle rose to his feet before he had ceased speaking and walked
stealthily on his tiptoes to an open door, where he stood for a moment
listening. i could hear nothing but the sound of the wind whistling in
the chimney.

wait here, he whispered presently, and then disappeared through the
door, closing it after him. i held my watch down to the firelight and
saw it was near eleven o'clock. i felt drowsy, and had almost fallen
asleep, when my uncle returned, carrying a lantern. rayel is asleep,
 said he, in a whisper. won't you come with me?--it will not take long.

certainly, said i, rising, and waiting for him to lead the way. he put
on his antique hat and threw a shawl over his shoulders.

it's a chilly night, said he. you'd better wear another coat.

i drew on my overcoat at once, wondering what new experience awaited
me. holding the lantern in front of him, he proceeded slowly and feebly
across the rear courtyard, and unlocked a door in one of the side wings
of the house, through which we passed into a large unfurnished room.

i always wait till he's asleep, said my uncle, shuffling across the
room and unlocking another door on its opposite side. he's never been
here--never yet, he continued, pulling the door open. the dim light of
the lantern shone out upon a thicket of fragrant spruce and cedar. as
i stepped down upon the ground, following in the steps of my uncle, i
could hear the murmur of the great pines towering far above our heads.
slowly we made our way through the dense undergrowth, and soon entered
an open space carpeted with pine needles and moss. it was a circular
plot in the thicket, and out of its centre rose an immense pine, whose
upper branches wholly obscured the sky. my uncle hung his lantern on a
knot protruding from the trunk of the tree, and slowly knelt upon the
ground, covering his face with his hands. suddenly he beckoned to me,
and i knelt down beside him.

listen! said he. do you hear voices? she comes to me here. can you
see her--my wife? look about you, do you not see her?

he laid his trembling hand upon my shoulder. again i saw that awful
gleam in his eyes. the gruesome suggestion he had made set my nerves
tingling, and i peered about among the shadows of that dimly lighted
recess, half expecting some vision to greet my eyes. then there came a
loud rustling of the branches high above us. the lantern light flared up
and suddenly went out, leaving us in total darkness.

she is here! he whispered, in excitement. sit still--do not speak.

a deep silence, intensified by the sound of the night wind in the trees
around us, followed my uncle's words. the going out of the light he had
seemed to regard as a signal from the spirit world, and i sat still as
he bade me, not doubting that his acute senses had penetrated the veil
which limited my own vision. i had seen so many revelations of his
strange power that i now sat awestruck and afraid, waiting for some word
from him to end my suspense. i could see nothing in the darkness, but
i could hear my uncle breathing heavily, as if trying to suppress his
emotion. suddenly there was a stir in the bushes near us. then i heard a
step like that of a man on the thickly covered earth close by my side.
i stretched out prone upon the ground, covering my face with my hands.
i could hear a sound as of some one groping about in the darkness, and
then i felt the touch of a strange hand upon my shoulder.



chapter vi


i shrank from the hand that touched me and, moving quickly aside, struck
a match and peered around. by its light i could discern the form of a
man standing near the edge of the thicket. rising to my feet i took down
the lantern and lighted it. there, standing before me, was the grinning
mute who had admitted me to the house. my uncle, who was still kneeling,
rose feebly to his feet, his eyes wet with tears.

good friend! said he, taking the lantern from me and handing it to the
mute. he alway comes for me here.

we followed the old servant in silence through the thick boughs of cedar
until we came to the door of a low-roofed wooden building that stood
by itself in the thicket. the mute opened the door, ushering us into
a small room containing a bed and some simple furniture. a comfortable
wood fire was burning in a large open stove, and we both sat down in
front of it, shivering from exposure to the chilly air of the night. my
uncle handed a key to the mute, who unlocked a cupboard, taking from it
a decanter of whiskey, which he set before us with glasses.

it will warm you, said my uncle, pouring out the spirits: i have
seen my wife. she always comes to me there--when the light goes out. she
knows your heart better than i. we shall leave rayel to your care. it is
the last time i shall come here. my work is nearly finished.

we emptied our glasses in silence, but my mind was busy thinking on
those impressive words, she always comes to me there--when the light
goes out.

it was strange--this going out of the light just at that moment. was it
not possible, i asked myself, that the lantern, being always hung on the
same projection, was thus in the way of a current of air passing down
the trunk of the tree when a gust of wind struck its lofty branches? if
so, the knot would naturally conduct the current into the opening at
the top of the lantern. my reflections were interrupted by my uncle, who
rose, and, taking a candle, asked me to accompany him. i followed him
into a cellar filled with casks and barrels containing, as i supposed,
wine and provisions for future use. returning, we passed through a
large room, in one end of which many boxes and barrels were stored. i
afterward learned that there was a large garden and poultry yard in this
lonely nook where my uncle's only servant was sequestered.

i was glad when we started back through the thicket, for the hour was
late and i felt the need of sleep.

he gives us our food, said my uncle, when we were at length in the
courtyard. we have enough of everything needful--but little meat. it
destroys mental power. it is fools' food.

next day my uncle was unable to leave his bed. i determined to go to
the hotel for my baggage and to post some letters, one of which gave mr.
earl an account of my experiences since the october night when i became
an inmate of that house.

it was midwinter now, and the long stretches of pasturage and meadow
land outside the walls were blasted and sere when the old mute, whom i
had seen twice before, let me out of the big gate. when i returned he
was there to open the gate for me and help me with my baggage.

i found rayel at his father's bedside. the sick man was asleep, and i
went at once to the library, where rayel soon came, as was his custom
in the afternoon, for a lesson in talking. both my uncle and myself had
taken great pains to teach him this accomplishment, and his progress
had been even more rapid than we thought possible. he caught the
significance of words with astonishing ease, but found some difficulty
in producing their sound. he went about it with great patience, however,
repeating the hardest words after me until he was able to pronounce them
correctly. but although the work was often tedious we both got much fun
out of it. i had never heard the sound of laughter in that house. one
day i broke its solemn spell by laughing heartily at the grotesque
distortion of my cousin's face incidental to the production of a
difficult sound. he stopped suddenly and looked at me, half alarmed.
this made me laugh more heartily, and he grasped my hand with the
serious air of a physician feeling the pulse of his patient.
being assured there was no danger, he indulged in a little offhand
cachinnation himself and was, i judged, well pleased with the trial, for
he repeated it frequently afterward, and greatly to his amusement.

the word woman, and others related to it, puzzled him not a little,
for he had never seen a woman, except through the medium of my own mind
and that of his father. the subject interested him, and he gave much
serious thought to it, questioning me closely at some of our interviews,
as if dissatisfied with the idea conveyed to him. our discussions,
however, had reached some slumbering chord in him, which, once touched,
stirred his blood with its vibrations. i do not think his isolation
could have lasted much longer, for he became restless and eager to see
the world.

rayel was greatly depressed by his father's illness. for months after
that night, the excitement of which had so hastened the failure of the
old man's strength, the silence of the great house was rarely broken by
the sound of our voices. my uncle lay helpless in a deep sleep most of
the time, never able to leave his bed until, revived by the freshness
of approaching summer, he had strength enough to sit in an easy-chair by
the window. some fatal malady, the nature of which he did not disclose
to me, was evidently sapping his strength. i had urged him more than
once to let me summon a physician, but he would not permit me to do
so. when summer came at last, he grew stronger, and was able to walk,
supported by rayel, to his chair in the open courtyard among the
flowers.

the lion, which had been confined in its cage most of the time since my
uncle had grown so feeble as to need rayel's constant attention sickened
and died in the warm days of early june. rayel was sorely grieved by the
death of his pet, and although he stood in the shadow of a far greater
sorrow, he felt deeply the loss of this lifelong friend. the summer
passed slowly, one day like another, casting on us the same burden of
anxiety and silence. i spent much of the time in my uncle's library,
poring over his books and trying to shake off the melancholy thoughts
suggested by my daily life.

one day in early autumn, rayel was sitting with me near an open window
overlooking the courtyard, where his father was enjoying the open air.

he will die to-day, said rayel, calmly. he told me he would die
to-day.

he seems the same as usual, i said. we cannot tell; he may live for
months yet.

rayel shook his head incredulously, and sat for a long time looking out
of the window in silence.

and i will go with you then? he asked suddenly turning toward me.

yes, i answered.

it was the first time he had ever asked me a question, for he could read
my mind like an open book, and to him all questioning was unnecessary.

while we were sitting there, thinking over our plans, my uncle summoned
us by rapping with his cane. rayel turned pale, and, with a whispered
ejaculation, hurried out of the room and ran down the path to his
father, followed closely by myself. my uncle was breathing heavily.

count it, said he, feebly extending his hand. rayel counted his
pulse-beats.

ninety-four, and growing quicker! he exclaimed, turning toward me with
a frightened look.

it won't increase much, my uncle whispered, feebly, but with a
cool and professional air. it will go down soon, and then death will
follow.

be calm, rayel, he continued, almost sternly, as his son began
weeping. be calm, i say! that music! do you hear it, child? do you see
what is passing now? tell it. let me hear you.

i cannot hear it, said rayel, looking earnestly into his father's
face.

hallucination! he whispered, groping about until his hand rested
on the head of his son, who was kneeling beside him. i seem to see
millions of forms around me. i seem to hear them, but i cannot see
you--nor hear you.

as if exhausted by the effort, his head fell back upon rayel's shoulder,
and he lay for a time, his eyes closed, struggling for breath. the
dying man's faculties would no longer obey the whip of his mighty will.
indeed, they had done him their final service, for in a few moments
he was dead. tenderly and manfully, uttering no sound of grief, rayel
lifted the lifeless body of his father, and bore it into the house.



chapter vii


in accordance with my uncle's wish, which he had made known to rayel, we
buried him the day following his death in the sunny courtyard where he
had spent the last days of his life. the funeral arrangements were made
as simple as possible, so as to exclude all except the functionaries
whose presence was absolutely necessary. a rector of the church of
england read the service for the dead before the body was borne to its
grave by the undertaker. when this brief ceremony was over, and the
great gates were closed again upon our seclusion, rayel said to me:

i must talk more with you now, if you will let me. he said you would
help me after he was gone.

it seemed idle to assure him, who already knew my heart, of the
happiness it would give me to fulfill the pledge of friendship made to
my uncle.

do you expect to see him again? i asked.

after a moment of the most serious reflection, he said:

oh, yes, i shall see him again--when i die, then i shall see him. he
has gone to the great father, who gives life, and who takes it away.

i found that rayel, although entirely ignorant of the creeds and dogmas
prevailing among men, was profoundly religious, and that his simple
faith was built upon the deepest foundations. he evidently gave much
thought to the relationship between man and his creator after he
felt the sting of bereavement, but it was a subject to which he never
referred in our conversation, unless, perchance, it drifted in upon us.

the weeks following my uncle's death, during which i was busy with
preparation for the new life that awaited us, rayel spent in his
studio working over some unfinished pictures. at my urgent request, he
completed the head whose resemblance to hester chaffin had so startled
and amazed me the night i saw it first, and he regarded it with fonder
interest than he was wont to bestow upon the work of his brush. i
believe that face was the closest presentment of a human soul i shall
ever see until standing, as i hope to stand some time, in the presence
of the redeemed, where that which is imperfect shall be put away. i
have said that the picture bore a strong resemblance to hester chaffin,
but her face contained only a suggestion of that fine quality which was
so strongly presented in my cousin's ideal.

my uncle's fortune, as described in his will, amounted to nearly
$250,000. the greater part of it--everything, indeed, but the house
and grounds--was in cash, represented by certificates of deposit
accompanying the will, and bonds of the united states. there was a
considerable bequest for me, whom he had named as executor of the will,
which, however, i determined never to apply to my own use, except in
case of rayel's death. a handsome annuity was provided for his only
surviving servant. the remainder was left to rayel.

having arranged for the maintenance of the old mute at an asylum not
far from the city, our preparations to leave were soon complete. i was
elated at the prospect of resuming my relations with the busy world
outside that lonely habitation. my first step was to visit a lawyer for
the purpose of ascertaining the legal formalities which i must observe
as executor of the will. rayel wished to go with me, and i gladly
assented, for it seemed wise as an initiatory step in the new life that
was awaiting him. he waved his hand to the mute, who stood looking at us
through the big gates after we had passed out into the road, and then he
walked on beside me in silence. the sun-shot haze of a beautiful autumn
day hung over the face of nature, and his eyes wandered down the long
stretches of landscape, and into the depths of the distant sky, rapt
by the vision that was unfolding before him. the changing phases of the
town he regarded with curious interest, which often expressed itself in
childish exclamations of surprise as we made our way through the crowded
streets.

he was constantly calling my attention to things which, though familiar
and commonplace to me, were little less than wonderful to him.

look! said he, suddenly taking hold of my arm. there is a woman!

he spoke in an eager, excited whisper, and shyly stepped behind me as
she passed us.

they won't hurt you, said i, subduing my desire to laugh at his
remark.

such unfamiliar exposure to the public eye soon began to grate upon
his nerves. i did not wonder at it, for nearly every one we met took
a second look at his commanding figure, and some stared at him rudely.
remembering my own emotions when i first stood in his presence, i was
not at all surprised that others were moved in a like manner. his were
a face and form that stood out like those of some heroic statue in the
throng of common mortals.

the proving and recording of the will was left entirely in the hands of
a reputable lawyer, who said that these formalities would not detain us
longer than a week.

we had determined to spend the winter in new york before going to
england. since reaching america my time had been quite filled with work
until my entrance upon the utter isolation of my uncle's home. it was
my earnest desire to see something of the big metropolis on the western
atlantic. moreover, mr. earl had advised me in his letters to give rayel
a chance to know more of life in his own country before bringing him to
england.

when at last the faithful old mute had gone to his new home, and we had
turned our backs upon the silent and deserted mansion, rayel was moved
to bitter tears. the thought of its loneliness, now that its master was
dead and we were leaving it, perhaps forever, brought sad feelings to my
heart. how calmly the old pines whispered together as we walked down the
road that morning i shall not soon forget.

we reached the american metropolis early in october, three years after
my first arrival there from england. i rented comfortable apartments on
fifth avenue, near madison square. as soon as rayel had recovered from
the fatigue and excitement of the trip, we set about unpacking his
pictures and getting them framed. our lightest room was reserved for a
studio, and the paintings were hung under rayel's direction.

we were scarcely settled in our new home when we received an unexpected
call from a newspaper reporter. he had learned from an art dealer that
we had some remarkable old paintings, and humbly begged the privilege of
looking at them. we made him welcome, of course, but i explained to him
that the collection was wholly the work of my cousin, who was not yet
old himself. in answer to his questions i assured him that the paintings
would not be exhibited in the national academy, and that my cousin's
work had never appeared in any art exhibition whatever, at which he
seemed greatly surprised. rayel was still shy of strangers, and, as
he was evidently a little annoyed at the presence of our visitor, i
shielded him from the need of taking any part in our conversation.

the next morning an article appeared in one of the leading dailies,
which subjected us to a glare of publicity not at all to our taste.

it went on to say that signor lanion, a young spanish artist, had
just arrived in new york and had taken apartments at no. fifth
avenue. lanion was the name which had appeared on our bill for
picture-framing, the clerk who had waited on us having taken it down
incorrectly. unfortunately, the article continued, signor lanion
does not speak english, and for that reason the reporter was unable to
interview him.

the paper described rayel's personal charms at much length, and claimed
the credit of having discovered a genius who, although still a youth,
had done work worthy of an acknowledged master.

we had deep respect for the influence of that newspaper before another
week ended. art managers, tailors, advertising agents, auctioneers
and numerous men and women prompted by no motive but idle curiosity,
besieged us until we bolted our doors in dismay against all comers. the
mail, too, brought us missives of varying import from persons who
had read the article, one of which was a polite letter from francis
paddington, a wall street broker, whose name i had heard frequently
during my american travels.

it was not stated, said he, referring to the newspaper article,
whether or not any of signor lanion's paintings are for sale. if
they are, i would be glad to look at them with a view to making some
purchases for my art collection.

the letter suggested an idea worth considering. rayel worked rapidly and
had already painted more pictures than we could hang to advantage in any
but the most liberal quarters. he was at a loss to understand just what
was meant by selling the pictures, but he was willing to sell them if
they were not to be destroyed--at least some of them. accordingly i
wrote mr. paddington, appointing an hour when we would be glad to see
him or his representative at our rooms. the gentleman himself did us
the honor to call. after looking at the paintings, he expressed his
willingness to buy the entire collection. i told him, however, that we
would not part with more than ten canvases, and he seemed glad to
buy even that number at a price which was so far in excess of our
expectations that i was loath to accept it. our beloved woman--that
was the title we had given rayel's strangely derived conception--was
among the paintings included in the sale to mr. paddington. rayel
thought he could reproduce it, and for days after it was gone he made
ineffectual efforts to paint another woman after the ideal of our
hearts. but, alas! try as he would, that face never came back to his
canvas. many beautiful faces were conjured by his masterful touch, but
they were other faces, and none of them satisfied us. the failure made
rayel unhappy, and tears came to his eyes when the woman was referred
to, as if he were mourning the loss of a dear friend.

our patron had conceived a great liking for us, and we were soon invited
to visit his house and meet a few of his friends at dinner. it would
give us an opportunity to see the woman--perhaps to buy her back
again--and we were strongly inclined to take advantage of it. our
patron's residence was one of the largest and most elegant on fifth
avenue. it was a matter of common fame that his entertainments were the
cause of more envy and heartburning in the fashionable sisterhood than
any other events of the season. i had some doubt about the propriety of
taking rayel to such a place, unaccustomed as he was to the refinements
and conventionalities of fashionable life. however, he had set his heart
upon going--he was so eager to see his beloved picture--and i did not
oppose his wish. in writing our acceptance of the invitation i
corrected mr. paddington's error regarding our name, and explained the
rechristening we had received in the public prints.



chapter viii


on the day of our appointment for dinner at mr. paddington's the
newspapers were filled with accounts of a sensational bank robbery,
which had occurred in wall street the night before. between midnight and
one o'clock in the morning, thieves had entered the metropolitan bank,
overpowered the watchman, broken into the vaults and stolen half a
million dollars in currency without leaving any clew behind them of the
slightest value to the police. the subject interested rayel intensely,
and at our breakfast that morning we talked of little else.

when they have found the thieves what will they do with them? he
asked.

send them to prison, i answered, where thieves are kept apart from
the rest of humanity.

and yet these thieves were not in prison. they could not have robbed
the bank if they had been in prison.

true, but there are a good many thieves in the world who are not
suspected. they look like honest men and are highly successful in
concealing their dishonesty.

i should think, he said thoughtfully, that one would know a thief by
his face.

remember, said i, that all men are not like you. most of them are
easily deceived.

why, then, kendric! he exclaimed joyfully, i can do some good with
this power of mine.

this conversation may seem commonplace enough, but it stands in close
relation to important events which will shortly claim our attention. the
subject which it introduces was not soon abandoned. we talked about it
on our way to the paddingtons' that evening, where we were cordially
received by our host, and introduced to a large company of ladies and
gentlemen.

rayel's wonderful skill with the brush had evidently been the subject
of some discussion among mr. paddington's guests. it was referred to
frequently, and somewhat to the embarrassment of my cousin, in the
exchange of greetings that followed our introduction.

greatly to the relief of my fears rayel seemed quite at ease. he
acknowledged the compliments paid him with gravity and self-possession,
but with few words. all eyes were raised to his face, as he stood head
and shoulders above a group of ladies and gentlemen who had gathered
about him. never had his presence seemed so magnetic and impressive
since the first time i saw him in his father's house. now, as then, a
new inspiration was stirring his blood and charging every nerve with the
wonderful magnetism of perfected manhood.

the last person presented to us was a young lady of unusual beauty,
whom i noticed for some moments standing across the room in earnest
conversation with our host. presently he made his way toward us with the
lady on his arm.

my daughter, mr. lane, whom i shall ask you to escort to dinner, said
he, addressing rayel. after i had been introduced to the young lady she
took rayel's arm, and the company proceeded to the dining-hall. my seat
at the table was almost directly opposite rayel. his grave and dignified
demeanor was made doubly conspicuous by the coquettish airs and ready
tongue of the young lady who sat beside him. under a steady fire of
compliments and questions and artful glances i saw that he began to grow
uneasy.

that was a beautiful portrait you painted! exclaimed miss paddington,
looking sentimental.

thank you, said he; my cousin also admires it, but i must own that it
does not quite suit me.

perhaps you are an admirer of the lady it represents, said she,
peering shyly into his eyes. the count de montalle has fallen in love
with her and has borrowed the portrait from my father.

ze picture--ah! monsieur, it is beautiful, said the count, who sat
near them. but ze lady--she sat for me long ago and i had ze honor
myself to paint her portrait.

he was a thin, wiry frenchman, with small, black eyes, a forehead
sloping to a bald crown, an aquiline nose and a pointed chin, adorned
with an imperial. the face was almost mephistophelian in effect. he had
painted her portrait! was the man an impostor? i asked myself.

the count is an artist himself, you know, said miss paddington.

yes--an artist? asked rayel in a half-incredulous tone. then he looked
inquiringly at the gentleman referred to, as if doubtful of his own
understanding of the words he had repeated.

yes, said the count with emphasis. for twenty years i have devote
myself to ze art.

to what art, sir? asked rayel, in a tone suggesting doubt.

i was now thoroughly frightened at the serious turn of the dialogue. was
this count a pretender and one of the many bogus noblemen of whom i
had read? rayel was sounding him, that was quite evident. i saw now the
mistake i had made in bringing my cousin to such a place.

quel impudence! exclaimed the insulted nobleman, under his breath.

forgive me, sir, quickly answered rayel, i did not know it was wrong
to ask you.

i wish you would paint my portrait, mr. lane, said the young lady, who
did not seem to appreciate the gravity of the situation.

that would be easy enough, he answered.

would it? ah, but i fear you would find me too plain a subject. i am
not beautiful, you know, but if i wore my best clothes you might think i
would do.

for some time miss paddington continued to spin out threads of small
talk, while rayel sat listening. the dinner was nearly over when the
climax came which i had already begun to fear.

it is strange, said rayel thoughtfully. you speak what is not
true, miss paddington. you said that the prince of wales gave you the
beautiful opal, but tell me--was it not your father who gave it you?

he waited a moment for her answer.

oh, i understand now, he continued. people do not always speak the
truth--do they?

the young lady turned red with embarrassment, while an unnatural smile
played upon her lips.

but--but what is the use of talking then? he asked. no one seemed
disposed to answer.

it is strange, he continued, with childlike naivete, turning to the
young lady sitting at his left, you have been laughing as if you were
very happy, but you have felt more like weeping. this must be a very sad
world! he ceased speaking as if some suspicion of the pain his words
were causing had suddenly come to him.

the whole company turned its eyes upon the two. the young lady's face
became suddenly pale and almost horror-stricken. rayel's words were
spoken in such a gentle and sympathetic manner that every one was
mystified.

have you read about the great robbery that occurred last night? asked
mr. paddington, with the evident purpose of diverting attention from
the young lady. the vaults of the metropolitan bank on wall street were
blown open with dynamite, and half a million dollars were stolen. no
trace of the thieves has been discovered.

too bad! exclaimed half a dozen of the guests seeking to enhance
interest in the subject.

zey were very bold about it, said the count, as he lighted a piece of
sugar soaked in cognac and held it over his coffee.

just at that moment a singular thing happened. the lights grew dim and
suddenly went out, as if the gas had been turned off. the burning cognac
cast a white flickering light upon the face of the man who had just
spoken.

you say there is no trace of the thieves, said rayel. that is
strange, for one of them is in this room sitting at your table.

only one face was visible, and all eyes were turned upon it, for now the
effect of that pale light keeping it in view was indescribably weird.
the eyes were suddenly turned in the direction of rayel, and a devilish
glare came in them for an instant, when the face suddenly seemed to
shrink back into darkness. the ladies and some of their more gallant
escorts rushed precipitately from the room. the servants hurried in
with candles, but light was no sooner restored than the guests who
still remained at table rose, as if by general consent, and left the
dining-hall. miss paddington and rayel were the last to leave the table.
when they had passed out into the drawing-room her father came and took
her arm, bowing coldly to my cousin. it was evident that our presence
was no longer desired in the house of the paddingtons. and no wonder!

let us go, i said, proceeding to the coat room. the count met us on
the way.

you are a liar--a jackass! he hissed into rayel's ear.

hastily drawing on our coats we stepped out into the chilly night air
and walked leisurely down the deserted avenue. neither of us spoke for
some moments. presently rayel asked:

what is a jackass?

he stopped and took my hand as if expecting an answer of great moment.

a man who always tells the truth in this world--he is a jackass, i
replied.

i was a little irritated by the trying experiences we had been through.
perhaps that is why my answer savored so strongly of cynicism.



chapter ix


painful as had been our introduction to polite society, the reaction
which followed it was scarcely less so. next day we stayed indoors until
evening, when we ventured out for a walk with fear and trembling lest
the newspapers had already increased our fame and our mortification. the
twilight of a cloudless autumn day was closing in upon the city, and the
keen, bracing winds which sweep over the american metropolis from the
sea brought the color to our faces. we walked down broadway, now quite
deserted, in silence, and as we were passing wallack's theatre rayel
stopped suddenly, and stood for a moment looking into the brightly
lighted foyer. stepping in, he beckoned me to follow. i immediately saw
what had attracted his eye, for on an easel just inside the entrance was
the portrait of our woman. on a placard below the picture was the name
edna bronson. our surprise was mingled with sad regret at seeing it
playing a false part to serve the ends of an unscrupulous manager.

perhaps she is here! suddenly exclaimed rayel.

that is very unlikely, i answered, but we shall see.

i bought tickets for the evening's performance and we hastened home,
strangely elated, to dress for the play.

our seats were in one of the lower proscenium boxes and quite clearly
exposed to the gaze of the thousands who filled the theatre in winding
rows, ascending and receding to the roof high above us. the garish
decorations, the gay throng bedizened with jewels sparkling in the light
and the hundreds of fair faces and bright eyes that were turned toward
us presented a spectacle entirely new to rayel. shortly the curtain rose
and the play began. its first scene was a counterfeit of real stage life
in an english theatre. an important performance is impending and at the
last moment both the leading lady and her understudy are suddenly taken
ill. the management is in a quandary. in the midst of its confusion the
stage carpenter suggests that he has a daughter who can play the part.
when this functionary came upon the scene my interest in the play began
to wax stronger. hester chaffin's father had been a stage carpenter, and
this turn in the scene startled me not a little after having found our
picture in the foyer.

the carpenter's suggestion is at first treated with ridicule. he insists
that she has learned the part from witnessing the rehearsals, and urges
the managers to give her a trial. the performance must begin in four
hours or be postponed. it is found that the costumes prepared for the
part will fit the young lady. they consent to try her, the company is
hastily summoned together for rehearsal, and the curtain falls on the
first act. the audience waited impatiently for it to rise again and show
what fortune might have in store for the carpenter's daughter, but of
all that audience i was probably the most impatient.

there is the count, whispered rayel, directing my attention to the
opposite box. the diabolical little frenchman was there, sure
enough, sitting next to the rail, and sweeping the audience with his
opera-glasses.

soon the curtain was rung up and the rehearsal began which was to test
the powers of the venturesome young lady. suddenly she appears at the
rear of the stage dressed for her part in elizabethan costume. she
is greeted with loud applause, and she stands a moment, waiting for
silence. the lights have been turned down and i cannot see her face
distinctly. before the last ripple of applause is quieted, she advances
down the centre of the stage and begins to speak her lines. that voice!
what is there in it that thrills me so strangely? when she ceases
speaking she is standing almost within reach of my hand. suddenly her
eyes meet mine and i see hester chaffin standing there on the stage
and looking into my face. she recognizes me, for she seems confused and
proceeds with evident embarrassment.

i turned to rayel--he, too, was deeply moved by this great surprise.

our woman has come to life, said he, in tremulous whispers. i knew we
would see her sometime.

how she had changed! she was little more than a child when i saw her
last: now she was almost a woman, but not more beautiful than when i
bade her good-by in the moonlight at her father's gate--long, long ago,
it seemed to me now. was the scene i had witnessed a passage in her
own life since i had left liverpool? at the close of the act an usher
carried my card to her. presently i was summoned to one of the corridors
where a lady was waiting for me.

is this kendric lane? she asked, extending her hand.

it is, i responded.

i have heard of you often. miss bronson is an old acquaintance of
yours, whom you knew as hester chaffin. would you like to see her?

i wish to see her to-night, if possible, said i.

may i ask you, then, to go to this address and wait for us until the
performance is over? hand this card to the night clerk of the hotel and
he will show you to our rooms.

scribbling a few words upon the card, she gave it to me, and hurried
behind the scenes.

rayel and i immediately left the theatre and walked to our apartments.
the play would soon be over and we had no time to lose. on the way
home i noticed that he frequently turned about and peered through the
darkness as if expecting some one to join us. he said nothing, however,
and as i was so preoccupied by my own thoughts, i did not ask for whom
he was looking.

shall i not go with you? he asked, when we had reached home.

you had better wait up for me; i shall not be gone long, i answered.

i can walk back again when we get there, or perhaps i can wait for you
in the hotel? said he.

he was not yet accustomed to life in a great city, and it did not seem
wise, either, to permit him to walk home alone, or to wait for me in the
hotel among strangers. he did not seem quite content to stay, however,
and there was a troubled expression on his face, which was new to it,
and which i could not put out of my mind after i had left the house. the
hotel to which i had been directed was on union square. it was not far
from our apartments, and i intended to walk there, but i had not
gone half a block before the street was lit up with a vivid flash of
lightning, followed by deafening thunder, and the wind blew damp in my
face. i hurried toward third avenue, intending to mount one of the horse
cars going down-town, but suddenly a fierce gust of wind swept over me,
sowing great drops of rain along the pavement. i looked about for a cab.
the street was deserted and so dark that i could see nothing except
the gloomy rows of brown stone that stood on either side. while i was
looking backward another flash of lightning illumined the street. what
man was that coming in the distance? was it rayel? no, that was scarcely
possible. i had only caught a momentary glimpse of him in the quick
flash. he was tall and erect like rayel, and i thought the hat was his.
but my imagination must have tricked me after all, for nothing showed
clearly. i walked back a few steps and listened. i could hear no
footsteps, but then he might have followed me, and i ought to be sure.
so i called, rayel! rayel! twice, and waited for an answer, but
could hear none. i had not time to go back to our rooms, as hester was
undoubtedly waiting for me now, and rayel was certainly not the man
i had seen, or he would have answered me. so i hurried along without
giving any further thought to my fears. but where was third avenue? its
character was not then so sharply defined as in these days of elevated
rail-roads--perhaps i had passed it. i had already walked a long
distance, and i had not yet recognized that thoroughfare. i could hear
footsteps behind me and i determined to wait a moment and inquire my
way.

i am going there--walk along with me, said the man whom i questioned.
just then we passed under a street lamp. i observed that he wore a large
coat and muffler and that he was walking under an umbrella. another man,
also under an umbrella, fell in with us at the next corner. as we walked
along in silence i heard some person coming at a run down the street
quite a distance behind us. i was listening to this sound when i
received a terrific blow on the back of the head. i fell forward, one
side of my face striking heavily upon the pavement. strangely enough, i
seemed unable to make any outcry, but i had not lost consciousness, for,
as i lay with my face resting on the wet stones, i could feel the rain
drops falling on it. i could hear those quick footsteps coming nearer.
yes, i could hear rayel's voice shouting in a loud and angry tone, but,
try as i would, i could not utter a sound. as i listened, the two men
clutched me with strong hands and dragged me through an open door,
which quickly closed behind them. it was no sooner shut than rayel threw
himself against it with terrific force. i could hear the door groan and
shake under the strain. once--twice, i was struck with cruel force upon
the head--then a loud roaring in my ears drowned everything.

i can remember well the first return of consciousness. it was like the
slow breaking of dawn in the sky. i could hear voices singing:

hark! hark! my soul! angelic voices swelling o'er earth's green fields
and ocean's wave-beat shore.

i could just distinguish those words. where was i? strange thoughts
began trooping through my mind. then a great wave of emotion swept over
me. i could hear a low moaning sound that came from my own throat.
i could feel the hot tears rolling down my cheeks. a gentle hand was
brushing them away and some one was speaking to me. i was lying on a
soft bed. a sweet-faced woman was bending over me, whom i had never seen
before.

where am i?

in the hospital, she answered.

the singing--who is singing? i asked.

it is the chapel choir, she answered; the services are nearly over
now. it is sunday.

is rayel here?

your friend? yes, he has been with you every day.

how long?

almost a month.

i tried to ask other questions, but a drowsy feeling overcame me and i
fell asleep.

when i awoke again rayel was sitting beside me. as i opened my eyes he
leaned over and kissed my hands.

they thought you were dead once, he said; but i knew you were not
dead--i knew you were not dead. i lay for a moment trying to collect
my thoughts. my head was in tight bandages and something was binding my
chest.

where is hester? i asked. rayel did not answer. he was not there, but
somebody was holding one of my hands. it was a lady kneeling beside me,
her face leaning forward upon the bed. who could it be? i closed my eyes
and listened to the rustling of withered leaves outside the window,
and the low humming of insects in the autumn sun. these were prophetic
sounds, and they opened the gates of thought and memory. a new life was
coming now. what was it to be? again i felt myself drifting into sleep.
i tried to keep my eyes open and resist the drowsiness that overcame me,
but in vain. when i awoke rayel had returned.

you have slept a long time, said he.

when i fell asleep a lady was here.

yes, it was our 'woman,' he replied--the lady you love. she has come
every day to see you.

where is she now?

she had to go away, but she will soon come back again.

who brought me here?

i broke down the door--i found you there. you could not see me nor
speak to me, but i knew you were not dead. the men were gone. i carried
you out into the street. a policeman met me, and i told him what had
happened. then the ambulance came and we put you into it, and you were
brought here. for a long time you lay like my father after he was dead.
your face was white--like snow. they had stabbed you in the side--they
would have killed you if i had not broken the door.

who struck me? i asked.

i knew, he said, his eyes flashing, i knew the devil was in their
heads--that is why i wished to go with you. they followed us that
night.

who? i asked, eagerly.

the count de montalle and another man.

my cousin's answer amazed me.

have you made known your suspicions? i asked.

no. i have been waiting to talk with you first.

do not speak of it yet to any one, i said. let us await
developments.

i foresaw that rayel would only get a reputation for insanity if pressed
to the point of explaining his suspicions. it seemed quite likely, also,
that any futile discussion of the subject would defeat justice.

that day brought me a letter from hester, whom i had been looking for
with much impatience since i had begun to feel more like myself. she
would shortly have fulfilled all her professional engagements, and
would then return at once to new york. i wonder, she added, somewhat
coquettishly, if you will be glad to see me. on this point there was
no doubt in my mind, and although my strength increased rapidly, the
days passed with tedious slowness after that.

i was sitting by the window one morning, looking out upon the moving
throng in the opposite street, when the door of my room was suddenly
opened. i supposed that one of the physicians had come to see me, and i
waited for him to speak.

kendric!

it was rayel who spoke my name, but somehow his voice did not seem quite
natural, and i turned to greet him.

this is our 'woman,' said he, advancing toward me with hester upon his
arm.

i rose feebly to my feet, confused by the sudden announcement, and took
her extended hand. we looked into each other's eyes for a moment without
speaking. my own were rapidly filling with tears, and i could see her
but dimly.

what a fine outlook you have! she said, in a tremulous voice, turning
suddenly to the window and looking out upon the trees now half stripped
of their foliage by the autumn winds. we both stood staring out of the
window in silence. for my part, i could not have spoken if i had known
what to say. how she had changed! the blushing little miss who had
awakened the pangs of first love in my youthful heart was a beautiful
young woman, now full grown and arrayed in costly finery. rayel was the
first to speak.

you must be glad to meet again--you have loved each other so long,
 said he.

honest rayel! he knew our hearts--their longings, their histories, and
also the vanity and pride that dwelt in them. why should there be any
concealment between her and me?

it has been a long time--a very long time to me, hester, for i have
loved you ever since we first met.

she turned toward me, her eyes filled with tears, and i drew her to my
heart and kissed her fondly.

we have only known each other as children, kendric, said she. your
heart may change and mine may change--let us wait and see.

then she left us, promising to come again next day.



chapter x


hester and her maid looked in upon me every morning after that, until i
was able to leave the hospital. during these visits we told each other
the eventful story of our lives since the night of our parting at
her father's gate. her first appearance on the stage had been, as i
suspected, literally represented in the play. for years she had been
permitted to accompany her father behind the scenes, and nights when
the cast was short she had played small parts with great success. the
glamour and excitement of stage life had proved distasteful to her. she
assured me that it was her intention never to go back to it, and this
strengthened my hope that she would some day consent to become my wife.
rayel had told her, during my illness, the strange story of his life.
she knew nothing, however, of his wonderful powers, until i had related
to her some of the experiences which had revealed them to me. he had
said nothing to her, i learned, about our discovery of the picture.

who painted the remarkable portrait of you which we saw at the
theatre? i asked her one day.

it was painted, i believe, by a french nobleman, who presented it to me
here in new york. i suppose it looks a little as i did once, but it is
certainly too flattering and much too maidenly for me now.

the frenchman is an impostor and worse, i said. the portrait was
painted by rayel and sold to a broker of the name of paddington, from
whom the frenchman borrowed or bought it.

her amazement could scarcely be overestimated when i told her what
occurred at mr. paddington's dinner-party.

the frenchman, she said, has been paying me unwelcome attentions ever
since the first night of my appearance in new york. he became so odious
to me at length that i refused to accept any of his gifts, and, in spite
of the protests of my managers, returned everything he had sent me,
including the portrait.

i did not tell her that it was this same frenchman to whom i was
indebted for my wounds. of that i must wait for more palpable evidence,
though not for my own convincing. it seemed strange to me then that just
at the moment this thought was passing through my mind she asked me whom
i suspected of having committed the assault. it occurred to me after
she had gone that possibly she had some cause to suspect the man who had
been the subject of our conversation.

rayel always came late in the day, when there was no chance of meeting
other callers, and stayed with me until bedtime. as returning strength
brought back to me that interest in life which prompts keen observation,
i could see that a great change was coming over him. his face wore a
melancholy look which indicated too clearly that his mind was suffering
under some sad oppression. he was as gentle and considerate as ever, and
as tireless in his efforts to increase my comfort, but he rarely spoke
now, except in reply to my questions. he would sit by my side for hours,
gazing out of the window with a vacant look in his eyes, until the light
of day grew dim and the lamps were lighted. when supper was served to us
i could never induce him to eat.

what is the trouble, rayel? i asked, one evening. you are not
yourself lately.

neither of us had spoken for a long time. he turned suddenly, as
if startled by my words, his lips quivered, and stammering almost
incoherently, he rose to his feet. then he stood erect before me for a
moment, looking sadly and thoughtfully into my eyes.

nothing, kendric, he said presently, in a deep tone that trembled with
emotion. i think i have been working too hard and need exercise--that
is all. then he grasped my hand warmly and bade me good night.

i believe his answer to my question was the first lie that he had ever
spoken.



chapter xi


next day i was discharged from the hospital, and rayel and i were driven
to our apartments. he had a number of surprises prepared for me. a large
painting on his easel, awaiting some finishing touches, compelled my
attention as soon as i entered the room. it represented a scene in
our own lives, which had lasted but a second, but which could never be
forgotten by either of us. he had seen me when i stood looking backward
in that vivid flash of lightning--there could be no doubt of it now,
for here was the scene transferred to canvas. the shaft of white light
shaking and darting across the black sky like a gleaming sword; the man
on the sidewalk looking backward with a startled glance; the big drops
of rain falling sidelong in the wind--these were all reproduced on the
canvas. his later pictures were characterized by a cynical tendency,
which i observed with regret. it was evident that his sensitive mind
had taken impressions from its brief contact with men, which were sadly
affecting his thought.

he showed me numerous letters, many of which were from women who desired
to visit his studio and see his work. indeed, my cousin had apparently
grown suddenly famous in the american metropolis. he was the victim
rather than the victor of fame, however, and regarded the matter with
very serious concern. the press of new york had been full of gossip
concerning his eccentricities since the event which had put my life in
danger. one of the society journals had printed a highly colored
version of that little episode at the house of the paddingtons, and had
concluded its article by saying that the fair miss paddington had fallen
madly in love with her father's strange guest.

that night, as we were sitting by the grate fire in our own rooms,
rayel, encouraged by our seclusion, began to emerge from the silence to
which he had seemingly gone back for refuge in time of trouble.

we shall soon be ready to start for england, i said.

i do not wish to go to england, kendric, said he. for a long time
i have thought over it. let me go back to the old house and live by my
father's grave, until the good lord takes me to a better home. i would
miss you, dear kendric, and every day i would look for you to come, but
i shall be happier there.

his words touched me deeply, and i was not prepared to answer him with
perfect calmness, although i had lately suspected that his despondency
would lead to this resolve.

why must we separate now, after we have become so dear to each other?
 i asked. something has happened to change your purpose since i have
been ill--tell me what it is.

to speak frankly, kendric, i must say that the world has sadly
disappointed me. it is full of vanity and deceit and selfishness. every
day brings to me some hideous revelation which the mercy of heaven has
hidden from others. i have seen the righteous forsaken of men, and the
wicked receiving homage; i have seen the unjust triumphing over the
just; i have seen some reveling in abundance while others were begging
for bread. everywhere i have found want and misery staring me in the
face.

remembering what christ said, i sold all i had and gave to the poor,
and now there is nothing more i can do. my best pictures, my money and
all my extra clothing have gone to feed the hungry and cover the naked.
and even now, when i have nothing left to give, i find as much misery as
before. often, since i have been alone, i have had nothing to eat and no
fire to keep me warm. then i feared to tell you what i had done, and i
bore it in silence, hoping that i might earn more money by painting. but
i could not work. when hester came back i told her all my troubles, and
she gave me money, not only for my own use but for the use of others who
needed it more than i. she and i have wandered about the city by day and
by night, ministering to the sick and the friendless.

he ceased speaking, his head bent forward upon his hands. it was indeed
a serious situation into which a too generous heart had betrayed him.
nearly all his fortune had descended to him in cash on deposit, and
payable either to my order or to his. he had therefore saved nothing
for himself that had been available for the satisfaction of his good
impulses. instead of displeasing me, however, as he feared, his action
only increased my love for him, if that were possible.

do not let these things trouble you, rayel, i said. we shall find no
difficulty, i think, in earning money enough for our needs. i cannot see
you shut yourself away from the world: you have yet an important work
to do among men. you are now morbidly sensitive to the misery that
surrounds us, but you will feel it less keenly as it grows more
familiar.

you do not understand me, kendric, said he, starting from his chair,
and pacing restlessly up and down the room. i cannot deceive you
any longer. in begging you to leave me, it is your own happiness i am
thinking of. please go as soon as possible, he pleaded, laying his hand
gently upon my shoulder. take her with you, and let me stay.

my heart seemed suddenly to have stopped beating.

my god, rayel! i exclaimed. are we both in love with the same woman?

no, kendric, no, he said quickly, taking my hand. i do not mean that.
i would not permit myself to love her, knowing that you love her also.

what, then, do you mean? i asked.

that there is danger, he answered huskily, sinking into a chair. i am
a fool not to have thought of it long ago!

his words seemed to sting me, and for a moment i could not speak.

you know what is in her heart, rayel, i said presently. tell me, is
it false, or is she, as i have thought, a pure and noble woman?

she is pure and worthy of your love, he answered. her life has been
much exposed to temptation, but her character has been greater than any
temptation. when she began to go with me among the poor i did not know
what love was. i had never felt the power of it, nor did i think of the
danger to all of us. when at last it came upon me, and i saw what
it meant, i resolved not to see hester again until god had given me
strength to subdue that passion. for days my heart was near breaking.
when you asked me to tell you what made me sad, i had not the courage to
do it. then i told you a lie. i did the very thing which i have so much
condemned in others. this trouble has taught me to comprehend and to
pity the frailty of men. i look forward with fear and dread for my own
sake.. i shall be safe in my father's house. i must go back, but, before
i go, forgive me. tell me that you do not despise me.

as he ceased speaking he laid his hand upon my shoulder and peered into
my face with a frightened and appealing look.

despise you! i repeated. no. you are dearer to me now than ever. what
you have told me will bring us closer to each other, if we consider it
wisely. as yet there is no pledge between hester and myself, save the
assurance given by unuttered thoughts. her heart is free. i have no
right to claim it. if she loves you i shall wish you both much joy.

that will not be necessary, kendric. i had rather die than know that i
had come between you. i cannot even risk the danger of it. i must leave
you to-morrow.

under no circumstances will i consent to that. my promise to your
father and my duty to you forbid it. to go back now would be cowardly
and unworthy of you. with my help and guidance you can do great things.
we must face the world with stout hearts. as to this trouble, let
us concern ourselves about it as little as possible. i believe that
whatever may be best for all will happen if we but wait with patience.

rayel made no answer, and for some moments we both sat looking at the
glowing embers in silence.

i shall obey your wish, he said presently; i cannot do otherwise.
i am like a child, and must look to you for instruction in all things.
perhaps there will come a time when i can repay you.

it will be a pleasure for me to help you as i would a brother, and you
will owe me no gratitude for it, i said.

we sat discussing our plans for the future until near midnight. when
we went to bed at last, rayel looked happier than i had seen him before
since my recovery at the hospital.

when i awoke it was near midday. i went to call rayel and found that he
was gone.



chapter xii


after waiting for him nearly an hour i went to a neighboring restaurant
for breakfast. on returning i found that he had not yet come back.
alarmed at his continued absence i went at once to hester's apartments,
scarcely expecting, however, to find him there, but confident that she
would be able to tell me where he was likely to go.

no doubt he has gone on some good errand, she said. has he not told
you of his charitable enterprises?

he told me last night how they had reduced his fortune.

poor fellow! she continued. in his zeal for others he quite forgot
his own needs. i would have told you about it, but that he implored me
to spare you any knowledge of his condition. i think we shall be able to
find him. let us go and try.

hester and i set out at once, walking rapidly against a biting east wind
toward the river. on reaching second avenue we took a car and rode down
among the big tenements towering into the sky on all sides in the lower
part of the city. alighting in the midst of these human hives, we
made our way through a wretched crowd, shivering in the livery of
destitution, down a long and narrow alley. entering one of the doorways
we climbed a steep flight of stairs, above which was a squalid throng
pressing about an open door on the landing. the women held children
in their arms, and many of them were crying bitterly. the men stood in
silence peering curiously over the heads of the further throng into the
crowded chamber. some of them greeted hester with great respect, and
moved aside that we might have room to enter. as we neared the door i
could hear a babel of strange tongues and the voices of women calling
down the blessings of heaven upon some one in their midst. it was rayel.
he stood in a corner of the room holding two little children in his
arms, and the crowd was pressing forward as if eager to speak with him.
he was talking in a low voice to those nearest him, but i was unable to
catch his words. there were men and women of many nationalities in the
throng. i saw italians, celts, poles, germans and even men whose swarthy
faces and peculiar garb betokened syrian origin. when we pressed nearer
to rayel i saw some, as they came within reach, extend their hands
and touch him fondly, uttering exclamations as they did so, often in
a tongue that was strange to me. these simple-minded people seemed to
regard him as a supernatural being whom it was good to talk with, and
whose touch it was a blessing to feel. a look of love and gentleness and
sympathy irradiated his face and invited their confidence. these were
evidently the poor whom he had befriended, and he was now taking leave
of them, probably forever. it was a scene the like of which few can
ever hope to witness. after all, i thought, what manner of riches can
be compared to the satisfaction which rayel feels at this moment? i was
quite ready then to applaud his unselfish generosity, for in that gloomy
and unclean place i first saw the full radiance of god's truth that it
is infinitely more blessed to give than to receive. we stood for a long
time looking upon this memorable meeting of cadmus and caliban. when at
length he caught sight of us, rayel came where we stood, and said he was
ready to go home. perceiving that we were about to go, the crowd hurried
from the building into the narrow alley leading out upon the street.
some shouted endearing farewells as we passed them, and many of their
hardened faces were wet with tears. the sun was just going down and the
shadows were deepening between the high walls looming above us as we
started homeward. hester insisted that we must dine with her and decide
upon the day of our departure. rayel and i went directly home for a bath
and a change of clothing, after which we proceeded at once to hester's
apartments. evidently somewhat fatigued by the day's experience, rayel
had little to say while we were eating dinner. it was arranged that we
would start for england by the first steamer on which we could secure a
comfortable passage. we had no sooner finished our coffee than a servant
announced mr. benjamin murmurtot, who wished to see miss bronson.

a reporter! exclaimed hester. there's no dodging them in america.
shall i ask him in for a moment?

we said yes, of course, and mr. murmurtot presently fluttered into the
room. he was a natty little man, with a large nose, a bald head and a
decidedly english accent.

delighted to see you, miss bronson, said he, delighted, i'm sure.
thought i'd call and pay my respects before you leave the city.

he greeted us all with like effusiveness and sat down facing hester.

it's very kind of you, said she; but pray how did you know i was to
leave the city?

why, i'm sure, miss bronson, everybody knows you are going home to be
married?

it is true that i am going home soon, said she, but i must decline to
discuss my object in doing so.

pray pardon me; i'm a journalist, you know, said mr. murmurtot, and
i earn my living by impertinence. have i not seen you before, sir? he
continued, facing rayel. i think you were at the theatre one evening
some time ago--sat in the lower box at the right of the stage--i
remember it well, sir.

i remember the occasion, said my cousin, with his accustomed gravity.

i read about that occurrence at mr. paddington's dinner-party, sir,
 continued mr. murmurtot. it was decidedly clever in you, sir--deucedly
clever! everybody is talking about it, now that the count has been
arrested.

arrested! i exclaimed; has he been arrested?

yes, this morning, for the robbery, you know. they say that the police
have secured evidence that will convict him sure, but it seems they are
not yet ready to make it public; reporters can't get the inspector to
say a word about it, you know--not a word.

there were exclamations of surprise and gratification from all present,
save rayel, who remained silent, while a faint smile stole over his
face.

i knew they would find him out, said he.

i hear that you are a mind-reader, sir, said mr. murmurtot, again
addressing my cousin.

and you are a detective, i believe, and not a reporter, said rayel.
it is good that we understand each other.

mr. murmurtot started with surprise at the remark.

i do not know how fully you may be acquainted with my secret, said he,
but permit me to assure you that i am here on a friendly mission.

i have no doubt of that, said my cousin.

let me proceed directly to the object of my visit, then, which is to
learn how soon you expect to return to england.

by saturday, if possible, i replied.

that is good, said he, turning toward me. the sooner the better. in
the meantime it will be my duty to keep a sharp eye upon you; i have
been near you all day. you need not feel any alarm--only do not be
surprised if you meet me often. i am responsible for your safety, that
is all.

for whom are you acting? i asked.

my dear sir, said he, rising to go, men in my line of business must
not talk too much. good night.

after he had gone we asked rayel to tell us more about this mysterious
visitor, but he was unable to do so.

when we started away hester put on her wraps and walked with us to the
cab. as we alighted at our own door i saw a man standing by the street
lamp on the corner, some distance away, whom i recognized as mr.
murmurtot. i found a letter from mr. earl awaiting me at home, in which
he urged us to hasten back to england as soon as possible after my
recovery.

you and rayel, he said, will, i trust, make your home at my house.

next day we began our preparations for the voyage.



chapter xiii


it was on a bleak and windy night in december that we were driven
through a pelting rain to one of the docks on the north river, which our
steamer was to leave at high tide in the early morning. when we alighted
mr. murmurtot stood shivering in a greatcoat and muffler close by the
passengers' entrance.

this is a good place for a warm greeting, said he, taking hester's
hand. i've stood here so long that my teeth are chattering from the
cold.

won't you come aboard with us? i asked.

not yet, he replied; but i expect to sail with you in the morning.

'sa rough night, sir, said the porter who carried our luggage, but
we'll find it a bit rougher outside, i'm feered, afore anither night.

fatigued by a long day of arduous work, we went at once to our
staterooms. i was soon asleep after getting into my berth, but was
awakened by the tramp of feet on the upper decks and the shouting of
the crew long before the ship left her moorings. they reminded me of
the first night i had ever spent on an ocean steamer--the night i left
liverpool on that journey fraught with danger i had not then dreamed
of. i had grown old very fast under the influences that had come into my
life since then. indeed, i was now a man, whereas i had been only a boy
when i left england. but rayel was with me now, and that repaid me for
all i had suffered. what would he have done in that lonely mansion
after his father's death? for hours my mind was occupied with these
reflections, and at length i determined to dress myself and go on deck.
rayel awoke while i was dressing and decided to go with me.

we found the decks thronged with people, and the ship's crew were
bustling about, getting ready to sail. we stood near the gangway, facing
the dock. a man was pacing back and forth in the opening whose figure
seemed familiar to me. presently he came aboard, and as he passed near
us i saw it was the omnipresent mr. murmurtot.

i wonder if he is afraid somebody will steal the ship? i remarked.

no, he is looking for some person, said rayel, divining my thoughts.

all ashore! stand away, there! shouted one of the ship's officers.

the passengers fell back, the gangway was pulled aboard, the great
hawsers were loosened, and the ship moved slowly away from the dock. we
stood for a long time watching the river craft and the receding lights
of the city. the ship was well beyond the atlantic highlands when we
went to our stateroom and to bed again. we slept until late in the
morning, and arose barely in time for a late breakfast with hester.
rayel seemed cheerful enough and took more than ordinary interest in
his surroundings. when we had risen from the table he led me aside and
directed my attention to a short, stout man with a bristly growth of
close-cropped black hair, a low forehead and shaggy eyebrows, who was
leaning lazily against the railing of the stairway.

let us avoid him, he whispered. i do not like his looks.

what can this mean? i asked myself, as we all proceeded to the deck.
perhaps he was the man the detective was looking for.

it was a beautiful sunlit afternoon, and the vessel rode steadily in a
sea that was growing quiet under the dying impulse that the winds had
left behind them. we drew our chairs together on the deck near the stern
of the vessel, and had settled down for a quiet chat among ourselves
when we were unexpectedly joined by mr. murmurtot.

delighted, i'm sure! he exclaimed, with the same inimitable drawl i
had noted on the occasion of our first meeting. i soon observed that
the artful little gentleman was master of an elaborate system of
exclamations by which he encouraged one to talk freely without saying
anything himself.

in response to my assertion that we had been exceedingly busy getting
ready for the trip he said simply: indeed!

it was a very unusual burst of confidence in which he was moved to
express his views with any greater freedom. when the remark which
preceded it was evidently expected to meet with mr. murmurtot's
concurrence, then he would say, yes, indeed!

if the remark were one to which this response would be inappropriate he
often went to the extent of observing, i dare say! seemingly
ventured after careful consideration of the chances for and against the
proposition which provoked it.

my dear sir, i do not agree with you, he would always say when he felt
compelled to differ with me. if the difference in our views chanced to
be extremely radical, he would throw particular emphasis upon the word
dear, as a sort of recompense for his opposition. these forms of
speech, with occasional and slight variations, were always employed by
mr. murmurtot as a medium of thought and sentiment.

in the midst of our conversation i noticed the man whom rayel had
pointed out to me when we arose from the breakfast-table. he was
standing against the rail, not twenty feet from where we sat, and as i
looked at him he turned away and walked leisurely down the deck. in a
moment rayel was on his feet, and, excusing himself, he proceeded in
the same direction. an hour later, as he had not returned, i left hester
with mr. murmurtot and went forward in quest of him. he was in the
reading-room, apparently interested in a newspaper. as he did not
observe me, i sat down behind his chair without disturbing him. to my
surprise i saw that he was not reading the paper, but that his eyes were
furtively watching the mysterious stranger he had followed, who sat
on the other side of the room listlessly puffing at a cigarette. i was
seated scarcely a moment when rayel seemed to be aware of my presence.
looking from face to face until he had discovered me he arose and came
to my side.

i was trying to read a newspaper, said he, leading the way to the
door, but reading is still hard work for me.

i saw that you did not seem to be looking at the paper, said i, as
we proceeded to the deck. he made no reply, but stopped and looked out
across the waste of waters at the horizon.

do you know that man? i asked.

for a moment i stood waiting for his answer. apparently he had not heard
my question, and i repeated it in a somewhat louder tone.

he turned suddenly with an impatient exclamation. there was a flash of
anger in his eyes as he faced me. i had never seen him in such a mood
before.

forgive me, said he. i am only angry with myself. come, hester will
be looking for us.

i did not venture again to refer to our bristly fellow-passenger in
rayel's presence. never inclined to talk much, even with me, he was
becoming more silent than ever as the voyage continued. day by day his
interest in that strange man seemed to increase. he spent as little time
as possible in my company. when not with me he was hounding him about
the ship, keeping him in sight from some favorable point of observation.
what was the meaning of it? the question forced itself upon my mind
persistently by day and night, and begat in me a gloomy reticence which
hester was quick to observe. every day i expected some revelation from
rayel, but he said nothing about the man in whom he had taken such
extraordinary interest.

we had been over a week at sea, and i was sitting alone one afternoon,
when mr. murmurtot came along and asked if he might introduce an
acquaintance of his whom i ought to know. then he went to find the
gentleman, saying that he would return in a few moments. he had no
sooner left me than my mind reverted to the man who had been the bugbear
of my thoughts since we left new york. presently mr. murmurtot touched
my arm. looking up suddenly, i saw standing before me the very man of
whom i had been thinking.

mr. lane, let me introduce you to mr. fenlon, said the detective.
i shook the hand that was extended to me mechanically, and made some
incoherent response--i do not remember what. i had been taken by
surprise. my voice was unnatural and my strength seemed to have left me
suddenly.

are you not well, sir? he asked.

no, sir, he is not well yet.

it was the voice of rayel that answered for me. he was standing by my
side, his lips tightly drawn, and his eyes fixed upon the man fenlon.
there was a terrible look on his face as he stood there towering above
us. the man turned pale and moved quickly backward two or three steps,
staring at my cousin as if in fear of receiving a death-blow. for an
instant, only, he stood like some fierce animal at bay, then turned
and walked hurriedly down the deck. the situation was made all the more
impressive by the interval of silence that followed rayel's words.

forgive me, said mr. murmurtot, taking my hand, if this meeting was
unpleasant. it was necessary. then he bowed politely and walked away.
the sun was just going down as rayel and i entered the cabin, where
hester was waiting for us.

the captain thinks we will reach southampton before five in the
morning, said she.

i was glad to learn that our voyage was so near its end.



chapter xiv


after dinner rayel and i went at once to our stateroom.

i am out of patience with myself, said he, as soon as we were seated.
my mind is failing me just when i need it most. i have grown dull and
stupid. for more than a week i have been trying to find out that man's
secret. i knew that he had a secret, and that it concerned us. not until
to-night was i certain that i had found it out. once i could see the
truth clearly. no matter how deeply it was buried under lies--i could
see it. but now there is something like a mist before my eyes, and i am
sure of nothing. perhaps it is because i am now a liar myself, as bad as
any of them. god have mercy on me! said he, rising, and speaking with
much animation. i know now what is blinding my soul. when a man lies
he loses some degree of his power to distinguish between truth and
falsehood.

he stood looking into my face impatiently, as if waiting to hear what i
would say to his remark.

that would be the natural result, i have no doubt, said i; but
are you not trying to convict yourself of too much wickedness and
stupidity?

i had never considered the misfortune of knowing too much--of being able
to detect every difference between word and thought, between appearance
and reality. that was the power which rayel possessed, and it increased
his moral responsibility by as much as it transcended the power common
to others. here, indeed, was a man ripe for the fate of a martyr.

won't you tell me fenlon's secret, if you have found it out? i asked.
i've been thinking about it night and day since we first saw him.

be wise! don't try to learn too fast, kendric said he. you shall know
it soon, i am sure of that--indeed, i promise that you shall.

i am quite willing to wait on the future for everything if you think it
is best, i said.

we sat for a long time, making plans for our future life in england. it
was near midnight when we retired to our berths, but we were up early
in the morning, eager to catch the first sight of land. on reaching the
deck we were overjoyed to see the distant spires of southampton glowing
in the morning sun.



chapter xv


mr. and mrs. earl met us at the station of the southwestern railway
in london, and we were driven at once to their home. hester came to
breakfast with us, but mrs. earl would not let her go to liverpool that
day, ship-worn and fatigued as we all felt after the voyage.

you resemble your father, sir, when he was of your age, said mr.
earl, addressing my cousin, as we were eating. but you are larger, much
larger, than he was.

you were my father's friend when he was a young man, i believe? said
rayel.

yes, he and his brother were my best friends in those days. i tried to
induce him to study law, but he was more inclined to medicine.

rayel had found a man quite after his liking and the two were on the
best of terms at once. indeed, he seemed to talk with my benefactor as
freely as he ever talked with me. i found mrs. earl very much as i had
imagined my mother to have been--a full-faced, ruddy-cheeked woman; with
a sweet voice and gentle manners. she greeted me as if i were her own
son returned from a long journey, and when we sat down to talk after
breakfast, i felt the joy and peace of one who has found a home after
much wandering.

i spent the afternoon with mr. earl in his library, and he listened with
deep interest to the complete story of my life since the night we parted
in liverpool.

he had many questions to ask me touching the attempt upon my life, and
my replies were jotted down in his memorandum-book. after i had told him
all that i was able to tell he sat for some moments thoughtfully
turning the pages of the book, stopping now and then to read some of the
memoranda.

it looks pretty bad for them, doesn't it? said he calmly, looking up
at me over his spectacles. but we'll bring this matter to a climax very
soon, he continued. we haven't seen the last act of the play yet. you
need not have any further fear for your safety--i will look after that.
you may feel quite free to go and come as you please in this part of the
city. above all things we must avoid letting them know that we suspect
anything; it might defeat me in getting hold of the last bit of evidence
that is necessary to complete our case.

i nodded, and waited for him to proceed.

let us go carefully until we're sure of our ground, he continued.
your stepmother knows you are in london, of course. you must go and see
her. take your cousin with you, and--well, you will know how to treat
them. after all, you must bear in mind that in the eye of the law every
man is innocent until he is proven guilty. adopt that view of the case
yourself. you needn't fear anything from cobb or his wife. only be
reasonably prudent.

i've no fear that they will try to do us any harm, said i; and
i would greatly enjoy visiting the old house. perhaps we could go
to-morrow.

the day after. you'd better go down to liverpool to-morrow with the
young lady, and return by the night train.

that day saw the beginning of a deep and lasting friendship between
hester and mrs. earl. when we left next morning to go to hester's home
in liverpool, she promised to return soon for a long visit. by ten
o'clock we were well out of smoky london, on the way that i had already
traversed once before, with a cheerful heart most creditable to me under
the circumstances. mrs. chaffin was waiting for us at the gate when we
alighted in front of the old wood-colored cottage--that haven of weary
legs in days gone by. phil (who had lengthened noticeably in the service
of valentine, king & co.) was there, too, and all the rest of the
chaffin household in sunday clothes. mrs. chaffin was quite beside
herself with joy.

dear-a me! said the good lady, after the salutations were over.
dear-a sakes! how you've growed! i didn't think you'd ever live to get
s' big. i thought as 'ow som' 'arm 'd come to ye when ye went away, an'
hester--

mamma! exclaimed hester, with a reproving glance. don't tell him.

i'm that fidgety i don't know what i'm sayin'. the lord bless us, but
ye must be hungry! said the good woman, as she spread the table for
dinner. she had guessed rightly, and hester bustled about, helping
her mother get the dishes on the table, with a critical eye to all the
arrangements. rayel was much amused by the children, the youngest of
whom had climbed upon his knee and was taking liberties with his cravat.
he was wholly unaccustomed to the pranks of children, and we frequently
rallied to his defence. he seemed to enjoy them, however, and was soon
involved in a spree at which both hester and i laughed heartily.

this herring ain't extra good, sir, but i 'ope it won't go ag'in' ye,
 said mrs. chaffin to rayel, as we sat down to the table.

he seemed in doubt for a moment as to what it would be proper to say in
reply to this well-intended remark.

i have never eaten a herring, madam, said he, gravely, but i have no
doubt it will be good.

i 'ope so, sir--indeed, i 'ope so; but i dare presume to say that it
will taste bad enough to the likes of you.

mrs. chaffin (good soul) had evidently concluded that my cousin was a
man entitled to extra politeness. hester had adroitly side-tracked the
herring question and started another train of speculation, when her
mother's misgivings were again excited respecting the tea, which rayel
had just tasted.

murky, sir? she asked, with a glance of alarm. i 'ope it don't taste
murky.

mrs. chaffin's solicitude respecting the tea and the herring reminded
me of the first time i had stretched my tired legs under that hospitable
board at phil's invitation; of those big, wondering eyes that stared at
me across the table; of the songs and stories which beguiled the evening
hours.

the candles were lit before dinner was over, and when we rose from the
table it was to gather about the warm fire and exchange memories, while
rayel listened with deep interest. phil had been promoted from a pair of
legs to a pair of hands, and was now third bookkeeper for the firm. our
carriage came for us at nine o'clock. hester had decided to stay a day
or two with her mother, but it was necessary for rayel and me to return
to london that night, as we were to make an important call the next day.



chapter xvi


late in the afternoon of the day following our visit to liverpool we
ascended the big stone steps of my old home and pulled the bell. after
all, i found that my nerves were not quite steady while we were waiting
for the door to open. we had come intending to spend the night there,
and my benefactor had given me certain precautions not calculated to
make me feel entirely at home. was there some deeper plan underlying
his suggestion as to this visit than he had chosen to explain? i had not
long to consider that point, however, for suddenly the door opened and
a servant in imposing livery confronted us. i handed him my card and we
were shown into the reception room at once. presently he conducted us to
my stepmother, who greeted me with a great show of cordiality and some
tears. she had grown old fast since i left home, but she had artfully
disguised the evidences of age upon her face and neck. why had i stayed
away so long? what had she done to deserve such shameful neglect? these
and other questions taxed my wits for an answer that would neither
outrage my own conscience nor offend her. mr. cobb, who had just
returned from his office, suddenly entered the room. his face assumed an
ashen pallor, and he stared at me quite dumfounded for a moment, when i
arose and stood before him.

it is kendric. don't you recognize him? said my stepmother.

so it is! he exclaimed. but he's grown quite out of my recollection.
 the man had recovered his self-possession in a moment, and treated me,
it must be said to his credit, with marked coolness. i was likely to get
on with him very well, i thought, but the fawning attitude of his wife
quite unhorsed me. if i am to see the devil i'd rather he'd frown than
smile. cobb had very little to say to us, and left the room at the first
opportunity. in doing so he had shown scant consideration for his wife,
however, as it left a burden upon her shoulders that must have taxed her
strength. but she was not unequal to it. her smile broadened after he
had gone, and there was a tone of deeper sincerity in her expressions
of regard. we had been to dinner, and if she would kindly send a little
cold lunch to our room at bedtime that would be quite sufficient. during
her absence for dinner the reaction came. when my stepmother returned
she seemed to have suddenly grown older, and she looked at us through
haggard and sunken eyes. surely this was a terrible punishment she was
undergoing, and i pitied her. mr. cobb had an important engagement to
keep, she said, and hoped we would excuse him. slowly the evening wore
away and at ten o'clock we were shown to our room, greatly fatigued by
this trying experience. it was a room fronting the street on the third
floor, which i had occupied before i left home. the walls had been
painted white since then, with a frieze of gold along the ceiling.
my father used to sleep in the room directly under it. rayel had been
silent and absent-minded all the evening, rarely speaking except in
reply to some question.

i feel sad for some cause i do not understand, said he, preparing to
retire. i shall be glad when to-morrow comes.

we will go back in the morning, i said. you don't feel at home here,
do you?

he did not seem to hear me, but tried the door, which i had already
bolted, and then got into bed, yawning and shivering, for the room was
cold. i turned down the light, and, opening the shutters, looked out
upon the street, now deserted save by a solitary man who had just passed
the house and whose slow footsteps were gradually growing less distinct.
i crouched there, listening for some moments to that fading sound, when
it began to grow louder again. the man had turned about and was coming
back. as he passed under the lamp on the opposite corner i thought i
recognized the slim figure of mr. murmurtot. suddenly i was startled by
a noise in the room adjoining ours, and sprang to my feet in a tremor.
plague take my imagination! it was somebody going to bed. i sat down
again and for a long time looked out at the man walking back and forth
in front of the house. i was rapidly getting into a condition of mind
unfavorable to rest and, closing the shutters, i went to bed at once.
for hours i lay tossing restlessly from one side to the other, and
finally fell into a deep sleep. i must have slept a long time when i
suddenly awoke, laboring with nightmare. i had heard no sound, i had
felt no touch, but all at once my eyes were open and i knew that i was
awake. the lamp was burning dimly on the table beside my bed. how my
heart was beating! and my arm--how it trembled when i tried to raise up
on my elbow and look about the room!

who's there? i whispered. was it rayel standing near the bed, his body
swaying backward and forward, or was i yet asleep? everything looked dim
and weird. i seemed to be in some silent ghostland between sleeping and
waking. i rubbed my eyes and peered about the half-darkened room. it was
rayel, and, as i gazed at him, his eyes seemed to shine like balls of
fire. i called to him, but he made no answer. what had happened since i
went to sleep? alarmed, i threw the covers aside and leaped out of bed.
as i did so he stepped up close to the opposite wall, and, as his hand
moved, i could hear the grating of a crayon on its surface. in tremulous
haste i turned up the wick of the lamp and tiptoed toward him, holding
it in my hand. he was stepping backward and excitedly pointing at the
wall. he had been drawing a picture on its white surface--the form of
a woman holding something in her hand. i stepped nearer, still carrying
the lamp. a sharp interjection broke from my lips. the woman pictured
there was my stepmother, and it was a knife that she held! a man was
lying at her feet. again rayel stepped forward, and again i heard the
crayon grating on the wall. then he stood aside. great god! there were
drops of blood dripping from the knife now. rayel sank down upon the
floor and covered his eyes with his hands. i stood there, dumb with fear
and horror, looking first upon him and then upon the picture.

the silence of the night was unbroken save by those slow footsteps in
the street to which i had listened before retiring. but suddenly i heard
a low wailing cry in the room adjoining ours. it so startled me that
i came near dropping the lamp. strange and weird it sounded, gradually
growing shriller and more terrible to hear! it was the voice of my
stepmother. was she dreaming? and had rayel seen the vision that
affrighted her? was that dagger pricking her brain? in a moment the
swelling cry broke into a sharp scream, such as might come from one
exposed to sudden peril, and ceased. then the sound of a bell rang
sharply through the house, followed by loud knocking at the door and a
man's shout.

open the door, i command you! he said.

he must have heard that piercing cry. rayel still lay motionless upon
the floor. was he asleep? why did he not rise? i began to feel numb. i
seemed to have lost the power of motion. i could hear some one rapping
at our door, but i could not move.

kendric! kendric! kendric! was it my stepmother who was calling me?
what a piteous, pleading tone! let me speak to you, kendric! for god's
sake, let me tell you! i was reeling: my strength had all left me.
crash! went the lamp at my feet. there was a great flash of light, which
dazzled my eyes, and i fell heavily upon the floor.

i was in the open air when thought and feeling came back to me. my hands
and face were paining me as if they had been terribly burned. there were
a number of men standing over a motionless figure that lay beside me.

the poor lad! said one of the men he's nearly roasted. see here
how the clothes have been burned away from his neck! can't ye stop the
blood? the mon'll die afore the amb'lance comes ef we don't stop the
blood. a brave mon he is, too. d'ye see 'im coming down the stairs with
th' other one on his back?

of whom were they talking? i struggled to my feet--i could feel no pain
now--and bent over that still form which had been lying beside me. oh!
it was the heaven-blessed face of rayel, now bleeding and scarred and
ghastly. i raised his head. the hair fell away where my hand touched it,
and a groan escaped his lips. i could not speak nor weep nor utter
any sound. a strange calmness came over my spirit and i sat there
motionless, bending over him i loved so well, while the crowd of men
looked on in silence. after his own image made he man; these words
came to my mind as i looked into that dear face. then i prayed in
silence--for him. thank god! his eyes were open now and his lips were
moving. i bent lower until i could feel his breath upon my cheek.

is it you, kendric? he whispered. did i save you from the fire? i
cannot see you, but i know you are here.

i heard his words distinctly, but i could not answer. the power of
speech seemed to have left me.

the fire awoke me, he continued, moaning. we were lying on the floor.
i called to you, but you did not answer. thank god! you are safe now.

returning consciousness brought with it an increasing sense of his
pain, and he began to struggle and groan in dreadful agony. suddenly,
extending one of his blackened hands until it touched my face, he
shouted in a loud voice:

kendric! kendric! help--help me!

then some men laid hold of me and lifted me up. i clung to rayel with
all my strength, but could not resist them, and as i was borne away i
knew that rayel and i had parted forever.



chapter xvii


after that midnight parting the first thing i can recall was the touch
of a gentle hand upon my face. when my eyes opened i saw hester bending
over me.

you are at home now, kendric, said she. such a feeling of weakness
came over me that i could not speak. i thought a nail had been driven
into my brain, but the tears that began rolling down my cheeks and the
moans that broke from my lips seemed to loosen it.

many days passed before i was able to reflect upon this last tragic
episode in my life or to take any thought of the morrow. one evening
i awoke from a deep sleep feeling a new interest in life. there were
people sitting in the room and talking in low tones.

has he asked for rayel yet? said one of them.

not yet, was the answer.

better not let him know about it yet. there's time enough. he'll be
around soon.

i called to them and they came quickly to my bedside. there were hester
and mr. earl and his good wife, all looking down upon me with smiling
faces.

you need not be afraid to tell me now. i know that rayel is dead.

they made no answer.

i know he is dead, but tell me how it happened, i said. there is no
danger; i am quite strong now.

mr. earl took my hand and told me in a low, calm voice, all he knew of
the tragedy. he only knew, however, that the lamp had exploded and that
rayel had been horribly burned by the oil.

i suppose, said he, that the lamp was on a table near his bed when it
exploded. in a moment the whole room was afire, and you, no doubt, being
asleep at the time, he lifted you up and ran with you down the stairway
and out of the open door. but in the meantime he had been horribly
burned, and he fell in a faint as soon as he reached the pavement.
strangely enough you were unconscious for some moments, although you
were not badly burned. probably it was the smoke.

then no one knows, thought i, what really did happen that night. the
lamp must have fallen almost directly upon rayel's head, and the oil had
no doubt saturated his hair and clothing.

and the house? i asked. is that--

in ashes, he replied.

then every trace of that strange event, which no eye save mine had
witnessed, was wiped out forever. the hideous secret had better never be
told.

if i was not badly burned, tell me why i have been lying ill.

brain fever, my boy, said he. too much excitement, i presume--but
you're out of danger now, and will be on your feet again in a few days.

fortunately the latter assurance was rightly spoken. the first day
that brought me strength enough to put on my clothes and walk about the
house, mr. earl invited me into the library to talk business. we were
no sooner seated than he unlocked a drawer and handed me a document to
read.

it was a deed of all my father's real and personal property.

they have both confessed, said he.

confessed what? i asked, wondering if the secret of my father's death
had come out.

the conspiracy against your life. there were two accomplices--one count
de montalle, formerly a servant of cobb, and now a convict in america,
and the other a man named fenlon, who is under arrest. these were the
men who tried to take your life. fenlon came over on the steamer with
you, i believe.

and my stepmother--where is she?

gone to answer for her sins at a higher court, said he. her last
deposition is annexed to the deed. the old hussy ran into the fire like
a miller, and stood there screaming, 'look at that picture on the
wall! oh, god! do you see it?' she shouted to the fellow who found her
standing in the smoke and flames. the chap was so excited he really
thought that he did see the picture of a woman holding a knife.

that is strange, isn't it? said i. who was the man?

a detective, said he, whom i hired to watch the house that night. he
heard some disturbance, it seems, and, fearing mischief, he immediately
forced the door open and ran pell-mell into your cousin, noble fellow,
who was then bringing you down-stairs. if he had been one moment later
the woman would have been burned to death, and we would never have got
this deposition. cobb wouldn't have been the first to weaken, you may be
sure of that. but after she had told the whole story, why, there was no
use in holding out. badly burned? no, strange to say, she was not badly
burned, but frightened out of her wits. the nervous shock was too much
for her and soon led to fatal results. cobb will go to prison.

i made no reply. i could not have found words to express the thoughts
that came trooping through my brain.

i have to tell you, he continued, that your cousin left a will
bequeathing to you his father's house and a number of valuable
paintings.

i turned away and burning tears of sorrow came to my eyes. it was indeed
a sad inheritance--the earthly part of his great riches--and of little
moment to me. i could not bear to think or speak of it then, and i
begged my friend to hide the will from my sight until time might give me
strength to read it with composure.

one evening in early spring hester and i were walking along the shore of
the mediterranean at marseilles. i had been traveling through southern
europe since my recovery, accompanied by mr. and mrs. earl. hester had
recently joined us in this ancient city of provence. the sun was sinking
below the distant horizon of water, and his shafts, glancing from the
western edge of the sea, shot far into the immeasurable reaches above
us. we stood in silence while the great wall of night loomed into the
zenith, and then fell westward through the luminous slope of heaven. the
broad terrace from which we viewed the scene was quite deserted.

if it is a hopeless love i cherish, let me know it now, hester, i said
as we turned to go. i cannot wait any longer.

you can wait half an hour longer, i am sure, she said, hurrying me
along. we will be at home, then.

some months after hester had become my wife we received a call in london
from our old friend, mr. murmurtot.

you have been playing in a great life drama, said he to hester, and
i, too, have had a part in it. lest you may think that it was the
fool's part, let me tell you that i am the man who arrested the count de
montalle.

and the man who brought fenlon to justice? i asked.

the same. he confessed within three hours after you were introduced to
him.

          *    *      *    *      *     *   *

every week my wife and i visit rayel's grave and strew fresh flowers
upon it. a tall shaft of marble marks the spot where he lies at rest.
his name is graven in the stone, and underneath it are these words: he
was a man without selfishness or vanity.


                 the end.






end of project gutenberg's the master of silence, by irving bacheller

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the master of silence ***

***** this file should be named 7486-0.txt or 7486-0.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/4/8/7486/

produced by jeffrey kraus-yao

updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project
gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b.  project gutenberg is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (the foundation
 or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.

1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.

1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase project
gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase project gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original plain vanilla ascii or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4, information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
     license.  you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg-tm works.

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right
of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.


section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

for additional contact information:
     dr. gregory b. newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
